---
title: "Flocknote: A Simple, Powerful Church Communication Tool"
date: 2017-06-15
tags:
    - Waiting Tables
    - Podcast
description: "I talk with Matthew Sewell about Flocknote, an email and text message based communication tool for churches."
---

*Waiting Tables Episode 2 with Matthew Sewell*

{{< audio src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/waitingtables-media.com/audio/flocknote-church-communication-tool.mp3" >}}

##### What is Flocknote?

At my church, we recently started using [Flocknote](https://app.flocknote.com/TryFlocknote?ref=13609), an email and text messaging tool for churches. We use Flocknote to send out church-wide announcements and prayer requests, communicate with members of our small groups, and compose and send a weekly church newsletter.

Flocknote provides a simple web interface for you to manage your members, compose messages, organize groups, and even see who has opened your emails.

Unlike Tinyletter, a lightweight Mailchimp mailing list product we used previous, Flocknote makes it easy to segment your users into separate groups such as small groups, children's ministry group, etc. It makes signing up easy, and your users can unsubscribe at any time. You can learn more about [Flocknote's feature on their website](http://flocknote.com/overview).

Flocknote has a [monthly fee](http://flocknote.com/pricing) based on the number of people you have subscribed. The costs are clear and auto-draft from your account each month.

### Links

- [Flocknote](https://app.flocknote.com/TryFlocknote?ref=13609) - Text Messaging and Email for Churches
- [Flocknote vs. Mailchimp](http://flocknote.com/blog/flocknote-vs-email-marketing/) - Why use Flocknote instead of an email marketing tool?
- [TinyLetter](http://tinyletter.com/) - TinyLetter is a personal newsletter service brought to you by the people behind MailChimp.
- [@MatthewJSewell](https:/twitter.com/MatthewJSewell) - Matthew's Twitter

## Transcript



Tables. I'm really excited about this interview where you'll hear about a wonderful tool for church communications. Before you hear the interview, I wanted to briefly offer my apologies for the quality of the audio on this episode. Due to a technological fluke that I don't understand, there is static in the background whenever I speak during the interview. I cleaned up the audio as well as I could, but unfortunately I couldn't remove it altogether. I hope you will still take time to hear from my great guest and come back again to hear episode three, where we are going to offer an introduction to social networks for churches. Without further ado, here's the interview.

I'm here with Matthew Sewell, a happiness engineer at Flocknote. I'll let Matthew explain in a minute what a happiness engineer is. But Flocknote is a online tool for church communications. Their mission is to have the simplest, most powerful church communications tool that has ever existed. I've recently started using Flocknote at my own church, and it has been a wonderful addition to our church communications. And I'm here to hear from Matthew more about what Flocknote is and how it might be useful to you. So Matthew, if you can maybe start with why was Flocknote started and what's the problem that it set out to solve? Yeah, well, and I guess first, yeah, thanks, Tim, for having me on, too. Yeah, this is great. So, Flockdome's been around for, I think, about eight or nine years. I've been working for Flockdome for just about three, but our founder, Matt Warner, had just volunteered in his own church in a bunch of different ways, you know, music ministry, youth ministry.

Parish council, finance council, all those things, and, In the course of that, he just realized how terrible everybody was communicating between those groups in the church as a whole, reaching people between Sundays, that whole bit. And so that's really where the idea for Flocknick came out. If he was an electrical engineer or an engineer, I think, computer engineer, something like that for Lockheed Martin by trade, but still was really passionate about serving the church, Building a more connected church is kind of one of the other, I guess, mission statements that we like to use, too. So that's really where it came out of. It was just a really felt need that there wasn't really anything out there in terms of moving beyond the bulletin that was really effective in reaching the people who churches weren't already able to reach. So, you know, when I say that, I mean, you know, there's lots of solutions that are really good about engaging the people who are already engaged in a church. So, you know, I think in terms of the mobile app that they'll download, things like that.

But what Flocknote really keys on is email and text, that being the things that you and I check multiple times per day, probably to a fault, I would say. But there are things that we're already using all the time. And so what Flockwood just tries to do is to leverage that to help churches actually reach their people. And so that's where it came from, a really felt need at Matt Warner's own church. And so that's kind of the problem we're all sitting out to solve. Yeah. Yeah. And I've seen there are different services out there that we can have kind of your church private social network.

And it's hard to get people on board with that. They don't really want another social network to check. And you can do church communications through Facebook or Twitter or something but then you're going to exclude the people who aren't on those platforms and the thing that.

Flocknote, I think, has really hit on is going straight to the mediums that people are already using. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, you hit it right on the head. And it's not even that Facebook is a bad thing by any stretch or that a church website is a bad thing by any stretch. They just serve a very specific purpose, and that's not direct communication. So, I mean, it's one thing where you need a good front porch, as it were, and have a good-looking church website. And you need to maybe have a place where you can kind of have a fan page where people can go and look, but that's not going to solve the problem of, oh, one of our church members died on Monday and we don't have a way to reach all those people or the church is closed this weekend or, you know, we just want to reach out and say hi and thanks for being a part of our community. It's like they're not going to solve those things as well as email and text are going to. Yeah, so I'm 31 and I remember as a kid, you know, having a church, um.

A phone chain where there was a prayer request or an announcement, you called somebody and, uh, that person had two people they were supposed to call and you just tried to trickle it all down. And I'm really glad we don't have to deal with that. Um, but even, well, I can just give you a little bit of my story of how we, uh, my church communication story, how we came to use a flock note. So, uh, I, I am a lay leader in a church of about 100 some people, less than 200 people. Well, our Flocknote has about 130, I think, signed up for it. As with many churches, early on in a small church, you start with just an email list and people kind of reply all to an email list or something like that, which gets very cumbersome quickly. People, either someone's email address gets left out or someone wants to get off of the emails and there's no real way to unsubscribe yourself from that. And then we moved to... Doing like a Google groups kind of thing, where someone had to manually go in and add an email address to a list. And there was really, again, no way for people to unsubscribe. And I think people feel bad about trying to unsubscribe from the church email lists. And so if you have to ask, people just never do it because they feel guilty that they shouldn't be doing that.

And then that was getting unwieldy for us. And so we had switched over for a few years to Tiny E-letter, which is a service that is owned by MailChimp. And it basically allows you to have an email list and you have a single login and you can go in and you just have a text box and you can send messages to your email list. And it added the advantage of people being able to unsubscribe.

But it had a number of limitations. One, there was a single login and a single list. So the messages all had to be routed through me or a small number of people. And the people who could send them had to share this one login. So, you know, you had to be careful about who had the password and various things. And then it didn't work well to send from a mobile device, which is increasingly something we want to do is just be able to send out a message on the go. And then there was a single list. So we were sending out announcements about, you know, here's this fellowship group that meets with a small proportion of the church and everyone was hearing, you know, this group is canceled tonight because someone's sick. And most of the people just don't need that information and don't really care. And I think there's an issue of the more you can reach a point where you send so many messages that people are overwhelmed and they're not really paying attention to it. So that led to me over the last few years, starting to think about how could we do this better? How could we be able to divide up.

People who are able to send messages and then be able to send messages within smaller groups subsets of the church. And somehow I stumbled across Flocknote really just a couple months ago and I tried it out with, it's a free service for I think up to 40 names on the list. So I just tried it out with one of our fellowship groups for a little bit and it worked really well. And then I'd say maybe a month or a month and a half ago, we switched our entire church over to it. And it's been a huge success.

Yeah, that's a that's a great story. Yeah, thanks for sharing that too. I mean, it's, it's just kind of, it's neat to hear because I mean, we only usually encounter potential users once they have reached that endpoint. We've tried everything else. And so we really just want something that works now, but we rarely get the background. And so I think that's really pointed to see how, you know, all these other options, well meaning, though, they might be or, you know, effective, though, they might be for other markets or things. So, I mean, MailChimp you think of in terms of marketing, things like that, something meant for ministry where you're not oversaturating the entire list by sending every announcement to everybody. And you're, you know, adding a, you know, not every message needs to be an email and should, in fact, be something like a text message. Yeah, I think that's a great, yeah, great testament. And MailChimp, I know you have a little marketing page on your website, kind of why Flocknote instead of MailChimp. And my take on that has been when I've looked at MailChimp, which a lot of people know about and might think, oh, this is a good way to send out announcements. But MailChimp is a lot of work, actually, to send out just a single message. And if you just need to go in and fire off something quickly, you know, this group is canceled or is meeting at a different location.

It's a fair number of steps. Yeah, yeah, no, for sure. And then, you know, added to that, you don't even get the text messaging portion. You don't get the ability to segment out groups. One of my favorite features and one of those things that really perks up the ears, especially of larger churches who use Flocknode, who are exploring Flocknode, is the fact that you can have a person who's in –, 10 different groups throughout their church who maybe they changed their email and they only remember to tell two of those group leaders or even just one of those group leaders. On another platform, all of a sudden, nine of those groups lost the ability to connect with that person instantly. But with Flocknote, one group leader goes in, edits the email, and then it automatically reflects across all 10 groups instantly, which is just really nice and not something that's really out there. That goes along with the package that Flocknate offers. And I don't even know if that kind of a feature where it's segmented out into groups where it automatically reflects the change, how many tools can even say that too. Yeah, even we're in a pretty small church, but it's kind of a challenge of keeping your information consistent. It's a big, big chore. And Flocknate has allowed us to make some good steps in that direction. Can you give...

For someone who doesn't know anything about Flocknote, can you give maybe just the basics of how someone signs up and then maybe just talk about what does it look like if you want to make a list and send out a message to your church, just a quick verbal walkthrough of that? Yeah, yeah, of course. So, I mean, what's especially nice is you can get set up in about 10 minutes. I think there was a church yesterday who we saw created a network and then within about 10 minutes, it imported 80 people and it already sent their first note. It's just kind of cool to see that in real time, I suppose. Yeah, that was my experience. Yeah. So to sign up is just flocknote.com and there's a big button that just says try it free and you can kind of pick. It's basically just a simple sign up form. So your church name, your name, email, phone number and password. And then as soon as you hit go, your network pops up right in front of you. There should be a text that you get to kind of verify your network to make sure that you're a real person and not a bot. But other than that, you can – we have some default groups that are set up. One of them is just a test groups that you're in. So you can go and click the big blue button up in the top left corner to write a note right 30 seconds after you start your network if you really want to.

But we kind of make getting started really easy and learning how to use the tool really easy. Not only does the training take, I don't know, less than a half an hour or an hour, depending on how intensive you want to go into it. But we have a nice big set of, I think, eight buttons to kind of walk you through kind of the key things to do once you create your network. So it all can be done in five or ten minutes. So adding people to your network is as easy as just clicking a button and adding a person one by one or dropping an Excel file in. And then the Note Composer is really simple, too. I mean, you click a button, choose from three options, a blank email, a newsletter template or a text message. And then the buttons are real straightforward from there, too. So, yeah. So, I mean, getting started, like you said, Tim, can be five or 10 minutes and you can already have sent your first note to 40 or 50 or 100 people.

Just for the you know a church that is moving over from just some sort of monolith mailing list or just a bunch of email addresses in bcc you can start by just adding those email addresses and you make it as easy as possible to get that information in and then if all you want to do is be able to email everyone you can you can start doing that immediately right you you you have a group called the everyone group, I guess, where you can just compose a message to everyone and type your message and fire it off. And there you go. Yeah, yeah, absolutely. And that just, and the name that appears on the note is just the name of your church. And so it's, yeah, it's that easy. You don't have to create anything extra. So I, that's how I started using it. Cause we were using tiny letter before where we just had one big list and started by making that, that everyone group. And then I've gradually at our church, we have just four fellowship groups that meet in different neighborhoods. And I've added subgroups for that. And then a few other groups, we've tried not to make it super complex, but.

Uh, you, you can, you can start basic and then add on from there. And it's very easy. Uh, another thing that I really liked getting started, um, is like you said, the note composer is really simple and it also works great on mobile devices, which was not the case with tiny letter. Our pastor likes to be able to fire things off right from his phone and you can just load up the Flucknote website on your phone. You don't need an app or anything. You just go to the website and you can type your note right there. Well, yeah. And actually, hopefully within the next couple of weeks, we're just kind of waiting on like App Store approval basically. But there will be an admin app that lets you do the exact same thing. Cool. So you'll be able to actually just have that on your phone to use. So that would make it even a little bit easier. Yeah.

Yeah. And can you talk a little bit more? So one of the neat things is you can, within your groups, you can have people who are able to send messages just to that specific group. So if you have like a small group, you can say, here's the small group leader, he or she can send messages to that group, right? Yeah, exactly. So we have three levels of administrator and you can have an unlimited number of each, basically. So we have a super admin at the top. So that's your pastor, communication director, whoever's going to be in charge of the whole thing. But then within each group, yeah, you can make what we call a group admin who can add members, send notes, change settings for just that group, and then a note sender, which is obviously self-explanatory. It's only a person who can send notes, so they can't see any contact info. They can't edit any settings. But what that's really nice for is, one, delegating so that the church secretary doesn't have to do all of the work his or herself or the pastor.

And then it also really just kind of lifts all boats, as it were, in the parish, too, because you're empowering those group admins to just manage their own lists within Flocknote. But then as soon as they add all of their group members, those automatically reflect and go into the everyone group so the church as a whole can connect with a greater number of people. Because a lot of times it's kind of, I call it silo syndrome where, you know, different small groups have different groups of people and aren't always, or either aren't always willing or just don't realize that the church doesn't have that information themselves. And so that's kind of another way where Flockment helps you keep the most up-to-date for the most up-to-date info for everybody. So yeah, it's a really, really handy feature. Yeah. And the delegation, as I've already said has been one of the biggest benefits for me in that I can.

I don't have to send out all the messages. They can be done by the group leaders and people can be note senders. They can't add or remove necessarily, but they can send out notes as they desire. It's really nice. I was describing Flocknote to a friend who's in a church bigger than mine and his church just sends out, uses an email list that their church secretary or someone manages. is. And I was describing Flocknote to him and he was kind of like, so what's the catch? And I was like, there's no catch here. It's very simple. You can sign up. And it's also, there's a cost after you get, I think more than 40 people, but the costs are very reasonable. No matter the tier that you're at, you can create an unlimited number of groups, send an unlimited number of emails and text, and you'll only just be paying for the number of members in your network. So, you know, zero to 40 members is free always. You can use the whole tool. But then, you know, it just goes up kind of incrementally and it's really inexpensive. So, a good example is I think 400 to 600 members in Flocknode. A member can contain an email and a phone number. 400 to 600, I think, is $45 a month. So, if you think of the fact that you have how many big events where you're taking a collection of your whole church. We hear this all the time. Churches who send out a.

A text message the day before one of those big events, you know, on Ash Wednesday or Christmas or Easter or something like that, um, double attendance. Um, and we've even had churches say that they quadrupled attendance from the time that they first started doing that, um, compared to before. And so, um, so if you think of just the change in the collection, it more than pays for itself, um, in that sense. But, um, but no, that's, that's one of the things churches really like too, is that compared to what, or, um, when they think about what they're getting for the price, um, it works out to be incredibly inexpensive, especially for the value. And that's for the, especially for those churches who, like we've been talking about, you know, delegate really well, make sure all of their ministries are on there and are continually being creative in how they want to use it. Because, I mean, it is email and text, but there's a lot of room to think outside of the box in the sense. I mean, a lot of people think of emails as like, oh, I get my bills in the mail or I get requests for a fundraising in the mail or something, But they don't think that, you know, a text message just saying, hello, we're praying for you counts just as well and can be done just as well. We've had churches do Bible studies with their groups in Flacknton. So, I mean, the possibilities are endless. And so when you get something like that for a pretty small price compared to the number of people that you're reaching, it's more than worth it usually.

Yeah, yeah. So I think we pay $25 a month or something. And it was a no brainer for us. I mean, the value that we get out of it, it was, it wasn't even a decision to make. It was clear. So, and you just automatically bump up to the next tier as you, if you add more, the tier is by number of people you have signed up and you just, it bumps you up automatically to the next tier and you get an email notification. It all works very nicely. But one of the things that Flocknote prioritizes is also providing good support. If you have questions or concerns, you all have gotten a lot of emails from me, and you're always punctual and clear and very helpful.

Can you tell us a bit about that? Yeah, of course. Well, I guess, you know, for starters, the field of happiness engineering was a very rigorous field of study. I mean, it took many years to unpack.

But no, I mean, that's one of the things we really pride ourselves on. So happiness engineers, first and foremost, aside from the fun title, are just customer support. We want to make sure that we're providing a good level of service and kind of just making sure that there's a real person present to be able to answer questions and avoid the dreaded. And when you call your giant bank or the cable company or something, you get the seemingly endless list of automated calls and press one for this and press two for that. Yeah, we really try to pride ourselves on quick responses and able help. So usually if you email us, if you don't hear from us in the first two hours, you'll definitely hear from us in half a business day. We started, I think, to have three or four hours of live chat every day. And then we also have – with a small staff, it's hard to offer phone support, especially considering we have so many – I think we're up to almost 2 million users, not customers, but people who are subscribed to Flock London one way or another through their church or another ministry. And so it's hard for us to provide phone support, but we even have – if you say, hey, I'd really like to just chat over the phone about this, we have a way where you can kind of reserve a time slot and we make sure to call you and help out with that. So, yeah, so there's four of us savvy happiness engineers. All are incredibly wonderful people.

Yeah, so I mean it's pretty fun, yeah. Certainly not everyone will ever need support. I mean, you've designed the product to be an easy and accessible product, which is great. But if you have questions, if you have problems, I know that y'all are there to help. And that's a that's a nice thing. And that's frankly an advantage of using a product that you are paying for, Tiny Letter, which we used before, which is great and fine, but it's not paid for. And and.

You don't get the kind of support on a free product that you get for a paid product. Well, and I'll say it's kind of a twofold thing for us, which is really nice because, I mean, I don't consider this to be just a job. And I think I would speak for my three other fellow happiness engineers when I say that, too. We don't consider this to be just a job. We consider it to be a job as well as a ministry. And so, yes, I mean, we're a business. Businesses need to make money. And so we have a vested interest in making sure people are having a good experience. But also we try as usually always, I mean, we're always making sure that we remember that it's a person and it's a person who is in a church and a person who is in a church that has a mission, hopefully, in a church that has a mission that wants to just reach their people.

And so that's the way we try to approach it in addition to just, you know, checking the box and coming in things. So, yeah, I've really appreciated that. Another feature that I didn't really wasn't really looking for, but kind of stumbled upon and love is that your your note composer is more than just a text box where you can type text, but you can very, very easily divide your message into separate sections and the sections you can organize and arrange on the page and change the background color of the section and change the font in different sections and things like that. And they also are responsive in design, so they look nice on your computer and they look nice on someone's phone. And then within the sections, you have these little widgets that you can have a text widget or a button or an RSVP button. Those have been really nice for us. And I didn't really look for that going in, but have valued and benefited from those a lot. Good.

One of the things that we've started doing with Flocknote, our church has gotten big enough and we have enough going on where there's, it's just hard for people to keep track of the various things happening. And we have a website and it's not always 100% up to date. And we have a Facebook page, but not all the events show up there. And we have a bulletin, but not everyone reads the bulletin and various things. So I realized with the note composer, I could lay out a really nice kind of basic weekly newsletter for our church, which is, here's what's going on. Here's where you can listen to the sermon from Sunday. Here's where you can find our social media pages. These are the events that are happening. Here's some up-to-date prayer requests we have for you. And so I've started doing that each Sunday night and then sending it out Monday morning, which is, I'm just calling it our weekly update for the church. With Flocknote, basically what I'm able to do is you can go in and duplicate an old message. So I just take the weekly update from last week, duplicate it, and then update everything with the current information. And it makes it really easy. It takes me about 10 minutes. And it has been...

Extremely well received and that people are really appreciating the information that's going out in there. And it's a relatively simple thing, but it's also especially simple because Flocknote makes it really easy to send it out in an elegant and clear way because the note composer is so nice. Yeah. Yeah. No. And that's, that's one of my favorite things as well. I mean, people ask us, hey, do you have templates? And we say, well, no, but. I mean, granted, we do have kind of the freebie section with the preloaded content to give you kind of ideas for what to do for emails. But we intentionally don't kind of provide those templates, at least not yet, because it's really easy to make one according to your own church branding, the kind of imagery that you want in there. Get it all nice and made up the first time send it out and then just duplicate it the second time um and the third and the fourth and the fifth um and then just replace the information we have um, the uh catholic archdiocese of baltimore actually is a good example they we helped them create um a newsletter template for kind of like their their diocesan newspaper and they have a they have an electronic version of that so i mean that's just one example you know we helped them create some custom email headers and different things using just the same plain image module.

That Flocknote has. And, you know, you just create your little image files of the header files outside in Canva or Photoshop or something like that, and then just drop them in. So that's kind of another one of those outside the box things. When you see image, you think picture, but with Flocknote, it can just as easily be, like I said, you know, a header to put text underneath. If you want a couple of other font choices or color choices or something. So it's, yeah, it's really versatile and it's really nice. And churches who, like you mentioned, it sounds like you guys are doing, who do it well, really find a lot of success when they really kind of take that to the next level. Seemingly intentionally, you've avoided having people go in and have to edit HTML and do complex coding or anything to make those. But instead, you've built these really nice graphical interface for building what can be, you can make, you know, not every message that comes has to look exactly the same. You can customize it and you can design it how you want, but it's just so easy. Like that, that's really the kicker for me is that it's easy that, um, so when I started doing this weekly update email, I had the goal of, I'm going to do this and make our church appreciate it. And then I'm going to find someone else who appreciates it and will be willing to do this for me.

And, uh, one of the things you doing it on flock node is I knew that it's simple enough that no one needed any technical skill to do that. You just need to be able to use a text editor basically or you know a document like microsoft word or something it's easier than that right oh yeah yeah well and that's um and we get that question sometimes when people say hey you know do you offer the ability to edit html or something in the email we gently say no because you think of the average um the average church communicator um you know they're not like uh like you tim who um you know know software development know how to manipulate that and so 99 percent of the time, you know, they would see this and say, Oh, cool. I can, you know, fiddle around with this or that. Um, and then it ends up looking worse than it would have been. And so, I mean, to kind of like take that option away, but still leave a lot of room for versatility, leave a lot of room for creativity. Um.

It ends up being a net, a huge net gain in my estimation for folks who just kind of work within those confines and then really are able to make it make it powerful because they're focusing on the stuff that really matters, which is what you're sending out. And then we can kind of cover how it looks. But then, you know, what's being sent out is can be that much better. Yeah. Yeah. And again, the cool thing is it's free to start free for up to 40 people. If you if you want to try it you just go sign up for an account and start composing a note and you can just send it to the test group which will just send it to yourself and it's it's easy enough and, anyone can can jump right in and actually on that there are a couple other features of the composer that are neat one is you can you can work on something and then save it as a draft just like in your email and go back and send that later which is nice another really neat feature is right on the note composer, you have this button, which is send a test version, which will just email you, the editor, a copy of that message, which is really slick. It's a small thing, but it's easy because then you can see what it's actually going to look like when it comes in email. Yeah.

Another thing that's got a small thing, but it's been a big benefit for us is you can schedule a message to send at a later time. Right. So right there on the composer, you just say, I don't want to send it now send it on Saturday at 9 a.m. And, um, It's as easy as that. You press the send button and you can forget about it. Right. And it gives you a nice little wahoo congratulations for sending it.

You can also send out text messages. And the interface is all pretty much the same other than, you know, text message is short and not formatted. But you just go in and say, instead of an email, I want to send out a text message. Right. Yeah. And it's even simpler. Just like you said.

Yeah. You just click the text message button and there's 160 characters. So I guess maybe to clarify, we just pushed an update, what we call premium text messaging, which text messages used to always just come from an email, email to SMS, just kind of a standard text message basically. And it was 110 characters, but now we have the ability where you send a text message, have 50 more characters to work with, and then it will always come from a phone number. The phone number will differ from person to person, but from that group, the text will always come from that number. So granted, you can always put in brackets the name of your group, but if you just say, hey, texts are coming from this number or coming from the men's ministry or whatever it would be, I've even done this myself. I just save that number in my contacts because I know that it's coming from men's ministry if I get texts from that group, which makes it really helpful. And then this applies the same for emails, but we offer direct replies that people can just send a reply to a text that they get or an email that they get. And it doesn't spam everybody in the group, which is really beneficial and helpful for everybody.

And then also it just publishes in one central place on the note itself. So once you send it out in Flocknote, you can go and open the note back up in there on the right-hand side. in the comments section you'll just see all the feedback. This is really kind of neat.

Especially when you send out something that's good news or send out prayer requests or say, reply amen if you're going to say a prayer for our capital campaign this week or something like that. And then to just see the replies roll in after you send that is really kind of edifying, especially for a pair of staff and especially maybe for if there's certain times where – or if it's a church that's maybe been kind of down on its luck or gone through a period of trial or something and then you get something really positive. I'm just thinking of a couple specific examples where that's happened and it's just kind of, it's just really neat to hear the response from the administrators because, you know, I mean, church work is not always a thank-filled job. And so to be able to say, you know, to be able to offer that goodwill and then to hear back from folks saying, you know, thanks for the ministry you provide us and for taking care of us, all of that, it's nice to... Have that little bit of goodwill, too. Yeah, it's very nice. And then people can also, you can go in and subscribe to the feedback so that if you want, when someone replies to a message within a given group, you can say, send me an email when someone replies, which is nice. And then you can similarly, when you send a message, you can say, only show the replies to administrators. Basically, you can make the replies private if you want to do that.

And we've the text messaging, another just, you know, again, simple thing, but just makes it very nice is if someone is signed up and they don't have a phone entered or they don't have a phone with text messaging, you can just have the, when you send out a text message, it'll just email to the people without a phone. Yeah. Yeah. There's a, there's a little delivery tab at the bottom of both the email composer and the text composer. When you click it, it'll say, you know, 10 people in this group will receive it as an email and there's a checkbox below it saying five people can also get this as a text message do you want to to send it to those people yeah and so it makes it really helpful um to kind of even further customize and the phone call feature i know you had mentioned maybe wanting to touch on that too um it's just an automated phone call so if you have those older parishioners um who have neither email nor texting but still want to hear from the group There's also an option to send an automated phone call. I think it's $0.09 per call, and you just have to opt it in on each note. But it's also pretty handy in certain situations.

Yeah, I just wanted to mention that. Thankfully, at my current church, we don't need to use that. But the church I was at before, we had a woman who... Um, didn't have a computer. And so whenever a church email went out, it was someone's responsibility to call her and let her know what the email said. And flock note basically has a way to automate that. And not everyone's going to need that, but if you do need that, uh, that's just a great, great feature. Um, I want to make sure we mentioned, um, how people can join. I know we talked about how churches can actually sign up, but, um, but what's really helpful for, or what's really, really handy for churches, uh, just what we call text to join. So, um, it's kind of the bread and butter for getting new people signed up whose contact info you don't have yet. So once you launch Flocknote, get all the groups set up and everything. We advise planning a sign up Sunday or ideally two right in a row where you make an announcement from the pulpit at church on Sunday asking people to send a text in. You set a unique keyword for your church or for a couple different groups or whatever. People can just send a simple text, no need to set up a password, And then they can – it's just like a two- or three-step process where you get their name and their email, some additional information if you want to put that in there. And then they can choose to join all the groups at the church, again, without having to set a password, which is usually the big kicker so people don't have to create a new account for something.

And so we hear from churches all the time that have 700, 800. My own church, I did it a couple of years ago. We had 400 people sign up on a single Sunday. And so it's something that maybe flies in the face of conventional wisdom because they think people wouldn't want to bring their phones to church or something like that. But in practice, it's exactly the opposite. The ones who do it well, the ones who have pastors and communication ministers who make the announcement enthusiastically and give the people a reason to want to sign up. They always see a ton of success, which is really, really edifying.

Because, you know, there's one in our training webinar, we tell the story of St. Thomas the Apostle Parish in, I think, Crystal Lake, Illinois. They had 1,600 contacts before they started using Flocknote. And I think on Ash Wednesday, that was the busiest day of the year for them. And so they announced it at all of their masses. And they had, I think, 700 people text to join across all of those. Um, and then I think they passed out kind of some launch cards along with it. And so by the end of the day, they had 150 more who had taken those home. Um, and then over the course of the next year, they kind of continued to get their ministries on board. And I think have maybe have, you know, the youth ministry and some other ones, um, do text to join campaigns of their own, um, and built it up to 3,500 contacts total. So, um, so one, they increased the reach in 50 by 50% in a single day going from 1600 to 2450. And then they increased it by 120% from the very beginning to a year after they'd started. Now I think they're five or six years in. So they're one of our older parishes on Flacknote too, or older churches on Flacknote. So I mean it's something that we always say. It's like you might not think so, but this can totally be your church too. You'd be surprised what people are interested or are willing to give their information for if they see value in it. And that's really one of the crucial pieces.

That's great. And just a quick thing, but a nice thing is that you also make it available if the administrators want to download the data from Flock Notes, which is really largely just names and email addresses and phone numbers. You make that completely available. So you're not trying to lock people in forever. If they need to take that information somewhere else, that's available for you. Oh, yeah, absolutely. We make it. So we make importing, like we touched on earlier in the show. Importing is really easy. Exporting is really easy. So it's just one single button and it drops an Excel file of that info right in your downloads folder on your computer. And then there's also the filter tool. So if you have a ton of contacts and want to say, hey, show me the people who have subscribed within the last two weeks or the last month or something, you just want to export those folks, maybe to update like an external database or something like that, you can filter and then export. And that chunk of folks will be exported. Thank you so much for coming on, Matthew. I would just, again, if it hasn't shown yet, I really love Flocknote. It's been a game changer for us. And I would encourage anyone who is involved in their church communications to at least go check it out. I mean, you can try it for free and you can decide if it's right for you. And you can be in touch with the happiness engineers if you have questions. I know I had some questions about how things worked a little bit before I started and I sent an email and y'all responded.

Promptly and clearly and uh it's just a really great process so um there's no reason not to give it a try i think and let's see if it's right for you any any final uh comments or thoughts no i would yeah i would just kind of echo the same thing thanks for thanks for having me on and we're you know glad to get to work with great people like you and your church and um we would definitely uh appreciate anybody who wants to try it but i mean um i would say the same thing even And, you know, again, with my church, I use Flocknote and am a member of the Flocknote network there. And so, I mean, even outside of my role as a happiness engineer, I would recommend Flocknote wholeheartedly for church communication because it makes my life easier. There's lots of times where I have a young adult event or something and I'll get a text from the young adult group that says, oh, there's an event tonight. And I'll think, oh, shoot, I had forgotten about that. And if I hadn't gotten a text reminder, I would have missed out on great conversation with friends and usually great free food or whatever. So that would be my parting shot. Thank you, Matthew. Yeah, thanks, Tim. I appreciate it.
