---
title: "Church Finance 101 with Eric Syfrett"
date: 2017-11-02
tags:
    - Waiting Tables
    - Podcast
description: "Eric Syfrett talks about basic principles and practices for church financial management."
---

*Waiting Tables Episode 12 with Eric Syfrett*

{{< audio src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/waitingtables-media.com/audio/ep-12-church-finances-with-eric-syfrett(1).mp3" >}}

I speak with Eric Syfrett about the basics of finances for churches. After earning degrees in economics and accounting, Eric became the children's and an accountant at his church. He now serves as the Executive Pastor of [Kings Park International Church](https://kingspark.org/).

Many pastors and church leaders have little-to-no training in the specifics of church finances and are required to learn on the job. Managing church finances not only requires biblical wisdom and financial practices, it also requires conformity to legal requirements.

Eric talks about how churches are stewards of the gifts God has given them, and thus are called to handled their money well. This requires communicating with our congregations about our needs and how the finances will be used; it requires protocols and accountability for handling money as it comes it so that we are above reproach; it requires careful budgeting and continual expense control.

In a day when we continually hear about church financial scandals, Pastor Syfrett offers refreshing, biblical wisdom on effective church financial management.

### Links

- [ECFA](http://www.ecfa.org/) - ECFA provides accreditation to leading Christian nonprofit organizations that faithfully demonstrate compliance with established standards for financial accountability, transparency, fundraising, and board governance.
- [Church Law & Tax](http://www.churchlawandtax.com/) - Richard Hammar's website
- [2018 Compensation Handbook for Church Staff](http://amzn.to/2lFILbq) - Richard Hammar book
- [The Rocket Company](https://therocketcompany.com/) - Resources To Help You Grow Your Church
- [INJOY Stewardship Solutions](https://www.injoystewardship.com/)
- [North Carolina Center for Nonprofits](http://www.ncnonprofits.org/)
- [A Model Church Financial Policy](http://www.lifeway.com/Article/A-Model-Church-Financial-Policy)

## Transcript



This is an episode I've been wanting to do for a while, which is to start to talk about church finances and helping people think about financial matters and financial planning in the context of their churches. I think at many churches, including my own, this task is often handled by volunteers or pastors with little to no training in this area, and churches are trying to figure out how to do it. And I'm joined today by a special guest, Pastor Eric Seifert, who's the executive pastor at Kings Park International Church here in Durham, North Carolina. And Eric has spent a lot of time helping his own church in this area, as well as helping serve others. Eric, thank you for coming on the Waiting Tables podcast. It's a pleasure. Thank you for inviting me. How did you get into your role as an executive pastor or an administrative pastor at your church? I originally, I got involved in ministry at the church as a volunteer. I was working in children's ministry and helping out. Working with a Sunday school class. And I had more of an administrative background and a project came up. They needed some help with some work in the database. And we were trying to do a better job of tracking our kids. And so I started helping with some cleanup work in the database and then.

Was just exposed to the administrative side of work in the church and helped out in that fashion just as a volunteer from time to time for several years while serving in children's ministry, but also helping administratively. And after a season working in the marketplace, after my undergraduate degree in economics, I made the decision to go back to school to get a master's in accounting. And when I completed the master's in accounting, they were looking for a children's pastor. I had still been a volunteer over the course of that time, and they asked if I would be willing to come on staff if they combined the part-time bookkeeper job with a part-time children's pastor job, taking my accounting skill and training and putting it to use, in a kind of putting those two part-time jobs together so I would have a full-time role to support my family and also work in the church in two very unique areas. In distinct categories, but it worked for me based on what was in my heart and experience. That's great. That's a very unique story. I don't know that many people end up as church accountants slash children's pastors.

I had put out a call, I think on Facebook a while back looking for people who might be able to help me talk about finances in churches. And my sister and her husband met at your church and attended there for many years. And my sister jumped right to recommending you to talk about this. And she's been a part of many churches through her life. And when she was there, really encouraged and impressed by the way that you thought about these things and helped handle these things in contrast to sometimes other churches where financial matters can fall by the wayside. So your church is a relatively large church, and obviously not every church is going to have an executive pastor or an administrator or an administrative pastor. But at the same time, it's important for every church to be thinking about their finances. And it seems that this is often a surprise to pastors when they go into the ministry, all the financial and administrative concerns they have to think about. And they often don't really have even any training in that area. Before I came into ministry, I was very interested in helping friends who were operating small businesses. I actually got the accounting degree thinking that I was going to help people manage their money.

In small businesses. And when I went into the ministry, I was thinking I was putting all of that behind me. But in just a couple of years, it became very clear that the church in many categories operates as a business. There are financial resources that need to be managed. There's income concerns, expense concerns, payroll and human resources are big factors. A lot of ministry is done through people. And how are you taking care of those people who are kind of working for your church, be it a ministry staff or administrative staff? And it really is. It's something that I think very few kind of ministry training programs prepare a pastor. Most people get into ministry because they want to serve people and they have kind of shepherding motivations and motivated to expand the reach of the gospel.

And balancing a checkbook is not anywhere on that list. It's not one of those things that people are thinking about, concerned about. But unfortunately, I mean, it's a very important kind of factor in the church world, because if the money isn't managed well, then you have a risk of things getting taken or just not not having enough money to do the things that you set out to do. So these are all key to ministry, in my experience, thriving in a long and extended season versus simply surviving or or work. And we tragically hear stories all the time of scandalous situations that go on in churches through money being embezzled or stolen from... And then on the other side, certainly money is a factor as to why churches don't last in various places. They can't afford to continue to pay their pastor or pay their rent or mortgage.

And by planning and preparing for those things, we can, one, avoid these scandalous situations, and then, two, continue to see these ministries sustained. So we as Christians often frame this as we're stewards of the finances we have. What's your perspective on that and what it means for us to be stewards? I think for me, managing money in a church setting, you have to recognize two things. All of us as Christians are called to be stewards because we're taught in the scripture that we are not the owners of anything. Everything we have is God's. Everything we do use, the gifts that we have, they're all from him.

Then in a church setting, we're managing God's money that is given through God's people. And so there's a dual accountability to be upright stewards, managing with a high level of integrity, high level of commitment, to be faithful to that which people have committed their resources toward and really committed God's resources towards.

Honoring both levels of accountability. If we fail to be good stewards, we have these obvious effects of money gets lost or stolen or embezzled or whatever, or maybe a ministry has to close down because it can't go on. But we're also failing in our duty towards God if we are not honoring his money in the way that he asks of us. I think there's sort of two aspects of these matters. One is they're just the general principles of wise handling of our money is important for us to understand. And then the, unfortunately, often more complicated thing is then also our responsibility before the government in terms of payroll and HR issues and taxes and tax deductibility and tax status of churches and all that is a whole nother layer on top that's extremely complicated and can be and also very easy to mess up as I've learned in my own experience. Or I think the early church, when you look at the book of Acts.

Thankfully, they didn't have to worry about the IRS and factors like that public government.

They recognize that there are challenges that come up in the church. You look at Acts 6, you know, the call of the first deacons. I think, you know, the name of your podcast, Waiting on Tables, managing the aspects of the church so that the ministry can go forward and thrive by the people who are gifted and called to do that is a real, real fitting setting. And it takes people who are willing to understand and study the tax ramifications of the work that we do in the nonprofit sector as it relates to the U.S. Government, giving to Caesar what is Caesar's payroll taxes.

Rendering, you know, being faithful with the people that you're serving to honor them. labor is worthy of his wage. There's so many scriptural principles that speak to how the church's resources should be governed and managed with a mindset toward maintaining a positive reputation in the community and not, as you said, exposing the gospel, the church, the work of the kingdom to scandal. Or unfortunately, there's so much skepticism and cynicism about the church and money in today's world because of mistakes that leaders have made with their use of resources or perceived even perceived use of resources because of wrong unwise decisions and i would love to do more episodes in the future about some of the more technical kind of regulations and taxes and various things if anyone's hearing this and you know about those things or or know people who know about those things who'd be interested in coming on and talk about it uh that'd be great um just the the nitty-gritty of that can be a complex and uh and difficult um let's talk just at a high level um.

You had sent me an outline that you prepared as you've done some training on these things of I'm thinking through basic church finances. And at a high level, you can think about it in the way, you know, similar to a business of money comes in and we have to think about how to handle it. And then money goes out and we have to think about how to handle it. What are some of the things that we need to think about as money is coming in or maybe even stepping back as we're needing money to come in? And we have to ask of the congregation and frame that and hopefully do that in a God-honoring and a biblical way. I was just recently looking at Acts chapter 11, where it talks about a need had arisen. And one of the leaders of the church had identified that there was something coming up in the church that was going to need to be addressed financially. And so it says the disciples, this is Acts 11, 29, the disciples, as each one was able, decided to provide help for the brothers and sisters living in Judea. This they did, sending their gift to the elders by Barnabas and Saul. And I think this is the classic repeated story of what happens in a church culture and in a church organization. There's a vision. There are things that need to be done. There are things that are in the hearts of leadership to do.

And those needs, those ideas and visions are shared with the body, the body, as people are able, based on tithes, based on people's capacity to give above the tithe in offerings, they decide to provide help. Ideally, there would not be a compulsion that people would be able to give freely. And all of that comes through in how we communicate about the things that are in, the things that are needed and what's to be done. And and then the people give and they they send their gift through some channel that is identified as responsible, whether it's through ushers collecting and offering in a Sunday morning gathering or an online giving portal where banking and credit card information is stored securely.

And things are coming in in ways that the resources are guaranteed to go to the place that they've been identified as a need. So 100% of those funds getting into the church bank account so they can be used to meet the needs. That's certainly changing. The mechanics of it are changing in many churches as people are moving towards electronic-based giving. But still in my own church and many, we collect an offering plate with ushers and things. And it's an opportunity. The stewardship starts even as the money hits the plate to make sure that that money makes it into the right place and gets deposited and all those things.

Do you have practices that you've established in your own congregation around how money and checks that are given are to be handled? Certainly. I think the big category, and this is where...

An accounting term kind of comes into play is the idea of a separation of duties. And this is just that, that if you have multiple people who are in the process looking at what's happening and what's coming in, then you have increased accountability because any one person who's responsible for everything happening along the chain has a risk. Even if they're, even if they're completely walking in integrity, doing everything upright, then if something were to happen with the money at some point, there's a risk of them being open to accusation or, uh, even if they had not handled it, even if they had been handling things well, if they were the only one who touched it, there's nobody verifying that they had done things well. And so for us, uh, That looks like we always are. Our church, as you mentioned, is fairly large. And so we have 10 or 12 ushers who are collecting the weekly offering. They're collecting it in a room where everybody can see everything that they're doing.

The congregation member who's putting an offering into the bag can see that the bag goes down the aisle and goes back to the usher, that it doesn't stop somewhere and expose itself to risk. And then the ushers gather in a room where there's the 10 and 12 of them are together and then three together. And these are unrelated.

It's typically men in our congregation. We do have some women who serve as ushers, but it wouldn't be a husband and wife and someone's brother. So, for example, because, you know, if it's too close together, it's just additional risk. So three unrelated individuals would go down the hall we have a safe where the offering funds are kept and so the ushers those three ushers will work together to put everything in storage bags which they then place into a safe where the money is secure until an independent group of three or four i always recommend at minimum two unrelated individuals even in a small church uh two volunteers for counting the offering uh you could some churches use a staff to count the offering but some way to make sure that uh even if you do that when when our staff members count the offering at times we still would use two unrelated team members um if one treasurer bookkeeper assistant is on vacation then another person would jump in to help so that even our lead bookkeeper is never alone with any money so that, again, we trust her completely, but she's free of any room for accusation because she's just never by herself.

Her as well then uh yeah so that's i think that's all the steps and then so we have counters who count the money after the church service is completed on sunday which they put in the safe the bookkeeping staff of two comes in and takes that money to the bank on monday and so at that point the the count has been verified multiple people have verified that it's the right amount money that was collected and what had been given.

We do have one person who takes the money to the bank, but when they get to the bank, the bank teller verifies that it's the same amount that was counted when it was at the church. And so there's a, it just provides that double check and the separation of duties, as I mentioned. So there's security from one step to the next. We have a very similar practice on a smaller scale, but we strive for that same goal of being above reproach and they're always being someone who can verify, you know, if even it's not one person so that another person can, uh, another person can attest to what was done and, um, everything's, um, yeah, very similar practice. I like that a lot for various reasons. Um, we also have to, uh, track finances and because of the IRS policies, we have to keep track of the names of donors to give those out at the end of the year or quarterly, whatever, giving statements. So that happens for you. That's also when you are counting your offering that you're recording names from the check. Actually, we do that...

So the counting happens on Sunday, and then from the counting records on Monday morning, our team enters the data into the database that we keep track of the giving. And so I've seen this done in QuickBooks, which is obviously a classic off-the-shelf simple giving software. But then also we use ACS, which is a more robust technology system for churches. CCB is a popular one.

Aplos. There are several others that different churches will use to keep track of that. All of it depends on getting the right data into the system. So we do that on Monday. We actually use a check scanner. So the checks are scanned, electronically deposited into the bank, and the scanner matches a donor's historic giving information with the amount on this week's check. And so the first time you give a check, we have to put all your information in. But then the next time you give a check on the same checking account, it immediately says, oh, well, that was Tim. Tim gave a month ago at such and such an amount. And Tim gave again today. This check says it was for whatever amount. So the technology does a lot of those pieces, streamlines the work. It used to be a bookkeeping task of eight to ten hours a week to enter all of the giving in our church, which was three to four hundred gifts a week. And now that same giving level can be done in two or three hours a week because of what technology allows us to do. A little bit envious of that check scanner. We count them by hand at my own church, but it's about maybe 20 checks a week.

That's a really good practice. And I think in being good stewards, we're also building the trust of the congregation that they believe and can see that the church leadership is handling the money well. And I think a small way to do that is when the church is sending out the donor statements at the end of the year. Those are accurate and correct and have the information that people are expecting to see on them. And in doing that is building people's trust that the church is handling their money well. And I think that's a very important thing for us to be doing. On the other side of this, once the money comes in and then it is going back out, there are obviously a number of issues to think about their money being spent. But overarching all of those is thinking about budgeting. Why is it important for churches to prepare budgets and to attempt at least to stick to them? Certainly. Well, just like a personal family budget, Dave Ramsey is fond of saying, if you don't know where your money is going, how will you make sure it's going in the best places? He has a much catchier way of saying it. And I can't think of it at the moment. But tell your money where to go. Don't just watch where it went. Something like that. Right. So it's a budget is a financial plan that says this year we care about kids ministry. We care about youth. We care about adult Sunday school.

We want to have communion. We want to make sure that the power bill is paid. All of these are things that a church budget will be allocated to. Now, if in the coming year, we know that we have 20% more kids than we had a year ago, and so we want to allocate more resources because we're prioritizing serving children more, then you add to your budget to increase the flow of resources in that direction. And so it's a spending plan, telling your money, these are the things that are most important, paying our staff.

I've heard of churches that had to hold payroll because the resources weren't there. And so a budget, it says that we can anticipate that this amount of money is going to come in. This is how it's going to be spent. Ideally, you plan with contingencies so that if the amount of money that comes in is less than what was anticipated, you have backup reserves that kick in or you have discretionary expenses that you can choose not to spend. We try to work with a budget based on 90% of what came in the prior year. So a lot of churches I've seen and I've experienced work with, well, the same families that were here a year ago are here this year. So we can anticipate that we'll have the same amount of money next, like in the coming year to spend on ministry and do the things that are important. And sometimes that's.

90% is really hard to get to, to plan for less income. But the minute you have a family who someone loses a job or gets a promotion and has to get relocated, and now they're fellowshipping with another church they're giving is moving in that new space, all of a sudden, if you haven't budgeted with contingencies in mind, then you find yourself in a tight situation because you were planning to do certain things. Perhaps you hired a staff member thinking the money was going to be such and such a level, but then that circumstance has changed. And now you no longer have the resources to fund the team member who you were hoping to. And unfortunately, most people, if they're going to devote significant time to a church setting, anticipating it to be an employee type situation, not getting paid for an extended season of time isn't usually something they would feel comfortable with. They're not provided. You're not able to provide for their family and different things like that.

And so a budget kind of creates room and says, OK, these are the channels. This is how we're going to make sure that we do it. And there's seasons where we've had to say, well, we really want to hire another person to work in children's ministry. We want to hire another person to help in the worship department or an administrative assistant. But the resources are not there or the resources are there right now, but we don't have confidence that they will be there six months from now. And so it's unwise to make a commitment. You know, who sets about to build a tower without first counting the cost? You make a commitment to invest the resources that are in the categories that are most important to you. Your budget speaks a lot to your values.

Where you are committing the resources. If kids ministry is important, how does, what does it look like in your budget? If all your money is going to worship, then maybe you think kids ministry is important, but you might not be investing resources according. Yeah, that I could go down a long rabbit trail related to that. And that, that wouldn't help our listeners probably very much. So we can stop there. I was thinking about, as you were talking, Jesus saying, yeah, where your treasure is there, your heart will be also. So as a congregation, you know, individually, the members in the congregation are seeking to lay up their treasures in heaven. And we, as those overseeing finances, are using our earthly gifts that God has given us to be stewards over to lay up our treasures in heaven. And I think that is certainly reflected in the budget.

It's good. It's a good reminder. you know, we're getting ready to prepare our 2018 budget. And it's a good reminder as you sit down and deal with the nitty gritty of these things to think about the bigger picture and what you're actually doing. When you're going through maybe some of the more tedious details of if you're a church doing what you described earlier, eight or 10 hours of data entry on a Monday of counting checks and entering checks. It's a good reminder that that's a service to the Lord and a service to his people through doing that well. And how do we make use of the budget as the year goes on? So obviously, you can just make a budget and say, put a rubber stamp on it and say, we did it. But what are good practices in using the budget and seeing that you're actually abiding by it? The best systems that I have seen for churches monitoring and managing according to a budget over the course of the year are when you're consistently looking either on a weekly or monthly, monthly at minimum basis, comparing what came in to what was your budget anticipated amount? What went out? What was your budget anticipated amount? And doing that down to...

The the lowest degree that makes sense for your organization so it might not be beyond we we look at our budget now because of the size that we are in four big categories salaries internal ministry expenses outside ministry expenses so that would be money that we would give to missionaries and then the cost of our building and so uh utilities and for us looking at those four numbers and saying okay, how are we doing relative to sometimes repairs and things come up that were unexpected and you had to put extra money into a maintenance category that you weren't prepared for. And so if that happens in July, you may have to adjust the budget in August to make some decisions differently about back to school activities, because now you spent 2000 extra dollars that there wasn't $2,000 extra in the account to help fund that.

Operating reserves help prevent emergencies and having to make different decisions. But looking at your budget every month and saying, okay, how are we doing relative to our budget? We as a congregation, as our leadership team, look every Sunday at what was the budget giving goal and what was the actual giving. And so depending on how close those numbers are, if they're, you know, ideally we'd like to be at 102, 104, 110%, but some weeks we might be at 90, 92, 93%. And because spending plans have been written based on that budget, if it's 90, now thankfully, because we try to budget at 90%, we don't have to adjust a spending plan if giving is 90%. But if spending gets to 85%, now we need to look at, okay, wait a minute, we need to start adjusting some expenses because there's not...

If that, maybe it's 85% one week, it catches up the next week. But if it were in a sustained way, not hitting your budget goals, then you have to change it on the other side. You can't keep spending more than it's coming in. And so looking at the budget weekly, monthly, helps you to make different decisions related to money. At the end of the day, kind of financial reporting, including comparing numbers to budget, is really all about enabling the leadership team to make different decisions. And so making the best possible decision you have based on the information that's available means spending or not spending, hiring or not hiring.

Adding a ministry or, you know, perhaps contracting, you know, taking some things off the list based on less resources available or because you want to put more resources into an area that's growing a lot. These are all decisions you make by looking at your financial reports with that kind of critical eye and comparing to, okay, this is what was planned and this is what's actually happening. I would love to talk at length about a lot more of the issues here, but this show is going to be a lot for people to chew on for now. But if we can broach one more topic, and I didn't prep you much to get your opinion on this, but what about the idea of debt and churches thinking about taking on debt on behalf of the church? Do you have opinions on that? Thoughts on that? You really didn't prepare me for that question. Now you're going to ask me on a live audience, how do I feel about debt? The scripture.

I'm comfortable. I can answer that question. Scripture is pretty clear. And in my personal experience, it has been the case. The borrower is servant to the lender. The idea that when I am as an individual or I as an organization take on debt, I am committing a portion of the resources that are available to me in the future to repayment of that debt, right? So as a church, most churches, a lot of churches take on debt in the category of building a building. And we have a debt on our building that we built in 2002. We are in a repayment plan. We would like to increase the rapidness with which we are repaying the debt, but we're.

We are doing it to the extent that we have the resources available to allocate into that category. But that debt on our building means that the money that comes in for salaries and expenses related to ministry, expenses related to missions, that a portion of that money has to go in this committed category of paying down, paying a loan payment, paying down on the debt. And so for us as a church, every year we look at how many salaries, how many missionaries, how many ministries could have been funded if we weren't in a position to have to do that repayment plan. And it's sad for us. It's disappointing.

We would love to not be in that position, but we are not in the position to have paid that debt off at this point. We want to do that. We look forward to doing that in the years to come. The big category, building a church building is an awful lot like an individual purchasing a mortgage to buy a house because you're not likely to find a way to save $150,000 and set it all in an account to buy yourself your first house. However, if you can borrow a portion of that money from the bank and repay it over time, you can get into the house much more quickly than you would if you waited to try to buy the house for cash. The same thing is true for churches that I see for buildings. Often, and we were in this situation, we were paying five figures a month for rent for the facilities where we were.

And if we could raise funds and we did, I mean, we raised several million dollars in order to begin building a building that now that same five figures per month goes into a mortgage payment. But a portion of that is interest. And so if we could have raised enough to build the whole building for cash, then we would not have the debt position. But we also would not have been in the building as quickly as we were. And that was three years it took to build that building, even with raising, if we had waited to raise, raise it all, which we were trying to do, we were trying to build with cash, but we got to a point in the building plan where we don't have enough money to keep going based on the cash available and the church membership with, you know, consulted with the leadership and made a decision. we're going to keep going. We're willing to take on debt because once we move in, we'll have additional resources coming in. Once we move in, we won't have to pay rent anymore. So we can start paying that back down on the debt. And so we made the financial decision to take on debt for that building.

I suppose I haven't been involved with a church that has taken on debt for operations or for ministry expenses, that would make me nervous. I think just in terms of a building where you have a physical asset that if you, just like your personal mortgage, at the end of the day, if you had to sell the house, pay the debt off and move forward, you would be out of debt with the snap of a finger, theoretically, as long as you could sell the house, which a church building is a really hard building to sell, I would imagine. There aren't a lot of churches out there looking to just buy a space.

Uh, borrowing to build a building is something I think I've seen churches tend to be more comfortable with in our, in our culture today, avoiding debt would be my preference. We use a church credit card for a lot of our spending, but it's more of an expense protocol because we pay the payment off every month. We don't, we don't carry a balance over. Um, so that's the, those are the two kind of categories that I see debt commonly used in churches. Again, we're not carrying a balance on the credit card. We're not paying interest. I feel like interest... Ideally is a not the best use of God's money or an individual's money if it can be avoided. And so we made the decision because we're spending money in rent, which isn't building any kind of assets. To spend money in interest, which at least it's helping us get toward a portion of our payment every month is principal. So at least we're building an asset with dollar for dollar about the same amount going out per month. At least that was the financial decision that we made early on. And so if it is as simple as a dollar in rent versus a dollar in interest, then maybe there's room to say, okay, well, that debt's worth it because we get into kind of building a permanent building.

There are so many analogies to personal finance here. One of the temptations, it seems, is the second you start going into debt on a building, it's like, well, we're already going into debt, so we can do this one more thing, and we can do this one more thing.

And so we use debt as a lump term for everything, but the reality is it's the scale from whatever the bare minimum needs you have for a meeting place to all the bells and whistles that you could add. And that's a temptation that I think really has to be fought as a church is going into some sort of building or purchase or constructing a building? Certainly. We made the decision when we moved in. As I mentioned, we didn't have enough cash to pay for the final phase of the building process and had to take on debt. For that reason, we didn't decorate a lot when we moved in. We needed a sound system. We needed speakers and.

Very little artwork and very little kind of decoration. All of our spaces for several years were hospital white. And our facilities manager liked it that way. But we just didn't do the extras. We considered a number of those kinds of expenses as icing on the cake that for right now, we're glad to have a cake. It's okay if it's not iced until we get into a better financial position because we want to prioritize, again, being good stewards. And so we made the decision not to invest in some things based on not wanting to make that debt number get so high that it would be problematic or that it would be outside of a comfort zone that our leadership team felt was wise. And you can even think about doing projects in multiple stages. If you're a larger church and you're building as multiple parts or could potentially be built in multiple parts, you can do some now and wait till you can do more later and finish a basement later. There is just a lot of ways you can think about that. Eric, are there good resources, books or conferences, seminars, anything that you've particularly found helpful in this area that you can point people to? Certainly. I think the ECFA is one of the kind of more widely known church evangelical kind of looking over and recommending strategies and thinking about.

Their churches, as they're managing resources. Richard Hammer is an author, H-A-M-M-A-R, writes a lot, publishes a church compensation guide every year that you can look at that provides benchmarks and salary studies that you can evaluate based on your region of the country, based on the size of your church, based on the offering, based on a particular ministry staff member's experience and recommends a different salary, all of those things. Giving Rocket, the Rocket Company, Casey Graham is a...

It's more focused in the Rocket Company on how to rally additional resources into the church. So it's less on management of the church. But I think he does a really good job of what I would say is important is that you have to manage the money well in order to show yourself worthy of rallying more resources to come in. And so he does guide in that category. where I think it's more focused on the giving side, but he does speak to the other. Enjoy Stewardship Solutions is another one. Joe Sengel and the team there are very helpful. There's a lot of this kind of stuff online that is really helpful. I work with a pastor who is in a Baptist church, and Lifeway Christian Resources, Southern Baptist, a lot of things. And I believe many denominations also through the association, regional offices, things like that, will offer counsel and help as you're thinking about different things to help you in this area. The North Carolina Center for Nonprofits, at the end of the day, if you're in North Carolina specifically, a church is a nonprofit. Most of them incorporated under the IRS tax code. And so there's resources available there as well for leadership teams and staff members related to HR and finance.

Those are great. Some of those are new to me, so I hope they'll be new and helpful to others as well. And I will link to those things at waiting-tables.com in the show notes. Any final thoughts or concluding comments? Well, I think that it's been a pleasure. I thank you for the time today. It's been fun. Talking about something that I guess it makes me quite a nerd to think that talking about money is fun and church finance. Sorry, that's just me.

It's a calling from God to serve, manage, steward the resources of his church. And so I'm grateful to you and the people who are listening to the podcast for stepping up to want to do a better job of that in their ministries. And areas of responsibility and encourage them to pray. And, you know, Scripture says, if we lack wisdom, ask, and he will freely give. God will give you wisdom for a resource to tap into or something that will help you or a new strategy. I'm regularly, because of our ministry changes and directions, I'm regularly having to rethink and ask God for new strategies related to financial reporting and related to budgeting and expense control. And the technology available to us in the world today is significantly different than what Barnabas had when he was collecting money to take out to Judea.

But looking at how to use those resources well as a steward is important. And so asking God for wisdom in that area, I pray, will be helpful to each of us. Thank you so much, Eric, for coming on the Waiting Tables podcast. It's a pleasure. Thank you, Tim.
