---
title: "Social Media for Churches 101"
date: 2017-06-29
tags:
    - Waiting Tables
    - Podcast
description: "I talk with Tim Renshaw about how churches could consider using social media."
---

*Waiting Tables Episode 3 with Tim Renshaw*

{{< audio src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/waitingtables-media.com/audio/episode3.mp3" >}}

##### Facebook

Facebook recently announced they have over two _billion_ members. If you want to go where the people are, Facebook is it.

As a church, you should consider creating a [Facebook Page](https://www.facebook.com/help/104002523024878). This is different from a personal profile or a group. It will allow people to [check in](https://www.facebook.com/help/174846215904356), tag your churches in post, and see your public posts.
Facebook.

At minimum, go create the a Facebook page, add a profile picture and [cover photo](https://www.facebook.com/help/333543230019115?helpref=faq_content) and update your profile with basic information about your churches.

When you have a Facebook Page, people are able to send private messages to your church. Be attentive to this and respond to people's questions! Facebook has [documentation to answer your questions](https://www.facebook.com/help/994476827272050/?helpref=hc_fnav) on how Page messages work (and tell you how to turn them off if you want).

**Facebook is a great place to share the audio recordings if your church's sermons.** This lets people find and re-share your sermons on their own profile.

Once you have a Page, Facebook will repeatedly ask you to pay to advertise the page more broadly. This is annoying, but you aren't required to do it.

Consider creating a Facebook Page even if you aren't going to post to it regularly. It's worth it just so people can find you, find out basic information about your church, and tag your church in posts.

Thom Rainier has some [helpful tips on how to use Facebook effectively](http://thomrainer.com/2016/02/nine-keys-to-maximizing-your-church-facebook-page/).

##### Twitter

Unlike Facebook, I would only create a Twitter account if you're going to update it regularly. It's a great place to share links to sermon recordings each week.

I don't recommend auto-posting from Facebook to Twitter. Twitter posts have a limited number of characters.

I also appreciated [Thom Rainier's](http://thomrainer.com/2016/02/eight-effective-uses-of-twitter-for-churches/) post on ways churches can use Twitter effectively.

##### Instagram

Instagram is very popular! Though it is photography-focused, you can also share images with text on them. I use Instagram to show the personality of our congregation by sharing pictures from special services and church events such as work days. If you video record your sermons, you can use it to share snippets (up to 60 seconds) from your sermons. ([Here](https://www.instagram.com/p/BOc4v2aBPsR/?taken-by=shilohopc) is an example.)


##### Private Church Social Network

There are private, church-specific social networks, such as [The City](http://www.acstechnologies.com/products/the-city), available. In many contexts, it would be hard to get everyone to sign up for something like this. That's why [Flocknote](flocknote.com), which we talked about in [Episode 2](http://waiting-tables.com/episode/flocknote-church-communication-tool/), focuses on church communication by contacting people using email and texts.

### Links

- [How do I create a Page?](https://www.facebook.com/help/104002523024878) - Official Facebook instructions on creating a Page.
- [Create a Twitter business profile](https://business.twitter.com/en/basics/create-a-twitter-business-profile.html) - Official Twitter instructions on creating a profile.
- [Why and How I am Tweeting](http://www.desiringgod.org/articles/why-and-how-i-am-tweeting) - Post by John Piper (2009)
- [How do I create an Instagram Account](https://help.instagram.com/155940534568753?helpref=uf_permalink) - Official Instagram instructions in account creation
- [Buffer](https://buffer.com/) - Tool for sharing content to multiple social media accounts simultaneously
- [Friends+Me](https://friendsplus.me/) - Alternative to Buffer for sharing content to multiple social media accounts simultaneously

## Transcript



To focus on your mission. Now, here's your host, Tim Hopper. Welcome to episode three of Waiting Tables. On this episode, we're going to talk about social networks, social media, and how churches can use them effectively, and maybe even sometimes when churches should just not bother to use them at all. I have a very special guest on this episode, my uncle by marriage, my wife's uncle, Mr. Tim Renshaw, who is an elder in his church and also a businessman who does a lot of social media marketing in his day job, and he's thought a lot about these things. Welcome, Tim. Hi, Tim. Good to be here. I should have described you as the very patient Tim Renshaw since we just recorded this podcast for about 15 minutes when I realized we weren't actually recording.

It's a good warm up. We got an equipment test in. We got microphones, headsets working. So that's good. The problem is I turn off the air conditioner in my office while recording because it's very loud. And it's 90 degrees outside of my office. It's starting to heat up. But we'll have to keep moving. You're the more patient one. And I have a 70 degree office right now. Yeah, that sounds great. So we're going to talk about social media, social networks. I've run a Facebook page, Twitter page, Instagram page for my own church. And I know you have a Facebook page at your church. And do you largely manage that? Somebody else in the church actually runs that for us. The same nice lady that does our website. Oh, that's great. Yeah. I'm working on handing off our website. But for now, anyway, I'm staying with our social media. I was in the position, I think about five years ago, I sat down with our pastor and I said, look, we really need to think about how our church presents itself online. We need a better website. We should have social media, various things. And unfortunately, it was one of those things where if you point out a need, I ended up being the one who also has filled that need for the past five years. So be careful what you suggest because you may be put in charge yeah i want to talk through kind of.

My take is at this point, Facebook, Twitter, and maybe Instagram are really the main ones to talk about. Google Plus has never really taken off. LinkedIn, I think I would never go to LinkedIn to look for a church. I don't know if someone does, but it's not really the place for that. Don't be bashing Google Plus, though. That's it. I can't take any more to my favor. Go ahead. Well, it is what it is.

Yeah. The numbers speak for themselves. I'm not arguing that. Yes. And there are other things these days.

I'm sure some churches are trying to figure out how to use Snapchat or whatever, but we're not going to get into that today. Yeah, you better hurry. And the reality is all of this is constantly changing. And if you're hearing this a few years after we've made it, probably you need to think more about what's out there now. But let's talk first about Facebook. And I know you don't love Facebook for your own personal life. And but the facts are, you know, thinking about numbers, if you're using social media to try to to reach people, try to put information out there. Facebook is just where a lot of people are. Yeah, that's correct. I mean, it's kind of like the old question of the bank robber. Why did you rob the bank? That's where the money is. Why do you use Facebook? Because that's where the people are. Yeah. So I don't go to Facebook and look at it really ever unless I get a notification, but I post to it several times a day for business. Right. Yeah. I distribute to it to reach out, even though I'm not a big fan of going there for my own. Yeah. And there seems to constantly be stories about, oh, Facebook is dying. Millennials are no longer on Facebook, all these things. But it is not dead yet. So, right. Well, and it's, it's getting a broader demographic. So even if the millennials are leaving, then, uh, you know, there's other, I think I saw the biggest, the fastest growing is 65 plus on Facebook right now. Oh, interesting. Mm-hmm.

So there are several ways your church can present itself on Facebook. One is you, and this is the way I would not suggest, is you can actually just create a personal profile that's intended to represent a person for your church. And someone could come and click on you and click add friend for your church. And I'm largely bringing that up because I've actually seen that. And that's a bad way to use Facebook. It's confusing for people. Things are not going to be very publicly available. It's just, don't do that. Right. You can also create Facebook groups, which are an old feature of Facebook. They've been around for maybe since the beginning, 10 plus years.

I've actually been on Facebook since 2005. That's a lot of my life. And I remember them way back. And you can use a group for a church. Sometimes people create private groups if you just want kind of internal discussion for your church. And it's a fine way if you want people to be able to easily share events that they have going on or something. I would say public groups aren't really a great way of communicating about your church to people outside of your church because Facebook just isn't really designed for people to come across those as easily. So really what you should do, I think, if you're going to present your church on Facebook is create a Facebook page, which you do at facebook.com slash pages slash create. And this is specifically what Facebook has designed, in their words, to give your brand, business, or cause a voice on Facebook and connect with the people who matter to you, which is a worthy goal. The flip side of that, which maybe we can talk about in a minute, is Facebook also tries to use that to get money from you for advertising.

They at least make it available. So you can go on there and you just fill out a profile, basic information about your church. You can put it in your website, you can put your service times.

Kind of basic information. And I would suggest, even if you aren't going to be posting on Facebook, which you don't have to do, I would suggest that any church should go on and at least create that page and fill out that basic information because it effectively functions as like a landing page or just kind of a directory. It's the, you know, the address, basic information. I mean, one of the main goals is to be findable online as readily as you can. So as somebody that found their church purely online, I always hearken back to how we ended up at the church we're at. And it's, you know, providentially was all guided online. And if it hadn't been online, you know, I just showed up out of the blue. I didn't know anybody at the church. And we were trying to figure out how and why we showed up. So right, which is Yeah, I think people are still undervaluing the reality that how do people find out about churches, probably word of mouth, as one of the top ways. And the other one these days is probably online, churches are still concerned. You see people, you know, trying to advertise in the newspaper, or, you know, having a good sign on the road. We talked about that in the first episode with Chad Ashby. Having a good sign is important, but I doubt many people actually drive past the church and see it and then show up there. At least in the South where you and I are, I mean, you're passing a church.

Three churches every block, right? Right, you can't swing a cat at a church. Yeah, yeah, cat swinging is not endorsed by this podcast.

A cattail. I meant cattail. All right. Reads. So, uh, I, you know, one other point about that, about being findable and word of mouth. I mean, really word of mouth today is what social networks are, right? Yeah. Word of mouth is people taking your content from your page and sharing it to their social networks. Right. And some of this gets down to what is it you're trying to accomplish with your Facebook page and for, you know, I think there's a lot to be said on a quote-unquote social network, and a lot of times I think we think of them now as ad marketing networks, unfortunately, because that's what they've turned into. But our own members should be taking this page and propagating it to their social network and commenting on it, and that drives the bigger circle of influencers and makes you easier to find. Right, exactly. And that's one of the things that I do want to talk about, which is Facebook in particular, and other social networks as well, but Facebook makes sharing things kind of a core part of the system. Pretty much every post, everything that's on there, there's a share button, and then you can share it to your own profile. Yeah.

Uh, through the, the newsfeed and various things get surfaced back to your friends. And so one of the things, if you have a church page, someone could at the very basic level, just come on and share your church page. And so the people in your congregation can say on their Facebook profile, here's where I go to church and their friends will see that. And it's a good way, um, to communicate about that, uh, to your, to your friends. And I, you know, none of this from me is an endorsement of, you know, uh, sharing your church's Facebook page is a requirement for evangelism in the 21st century, but people are on there. Their friends are on there. You know, you can make this information available. Um, and, and, um, there are several other ways. Once you've created this page, people can, you know, you can do the at, and then you type the church name as you're putting a status and it'll like link the name back to your page. So you can say, Oh, I'm so happy. You know, we had whoever preaching at our church today, and then you can just have it linked back to the page. And if someone wants to know more about that church, they can click on it and find out the times and information about it. You can also check in at a location. So you can, from your phone, you can say, I'm at church today, which is not a terrible idea. I mean, let your friends know where you are and know how they can find you. And then just generally it becomes kind of, I mean, it's, it's sort of a directory.

People often use Google maps to find a place, but you can search Facebook for businesses and then it has the address pop up and it'll let you click on it. It'll open in your map app or whatever.

It's just, it's all kind of structured and organized that way to, they're trying to make it easy for people to find businesses and so they can sell ads to those businesses. But which does bring up one other thing. I know we're talking a lot about Facebook right now, but I think, you know, as part of your online strategy, make sure that your church is a business findable on Google maps. Yeah. I was thinking about that. Um, And that probably deserves its own episode because I know Google allows you to have a lot of control over that. And we had a lot of issues when we moved buildings to update that information and figuring out who's the administrator and various things. But, yeah, that's a really great point. And it is one thing we're having somebody on Google Plus as a help because you can augment that listing on Google Maps through your Google Plus page, like, you know, as a business, quote unquote, like on Facebook. But like you said, that could be its own podcast of the ins and outs of that. But don't forget there are other things besides Facebook and your people may be there. Yeah, yeah. And certainly, I mean, so we actually get, because of how we have it set up, Google sends us these like business reports, like how many people search for directions to your church on Google Maps every month.

And it's a lot. And, you know, I look for directions if I'm in a different part of town, and I just want to know the fast way to get there. So it's not necessarily always new people, but people are using that and having the right information in there is a really valuable thing. And that's another kind of overarching point here is if you're many of these tools are going to try to automatically get information, like Google is going to try to scrape information off your website and show it in the Google search index.

And they're also giving you the opportunity to say, hey, let's make sure this information is correct. Same on Facebook. You know, they sometimes auto create business pages based on websites or something. And if they're giving you the opportunity to at least make sure the information is correct, you might as well do it. Yeah, better to manage your own message than to let some algorithmic system attempt it. Yeah. And then one of the other things with Facebook is they make it easy for people to send messages to pages. So you can on any business or whatever, you can say, hey, I want to send a message. And this isn't like a public post that shows up on the profile, but it's a private message that gets sent to the administrators of the page. And I would suggest if you have the Facebook page, you should be attentive to that and responsive to that. And we don't get many messages, but we do once in a while. And one time our neighbor was really upset that we were mowing the grass at 7 a.m. And she used our church's Facebook page to complain about that. And we were able to use that to respond to her quickly. And our pastor called her and we apologized. And ultimately, us being attentive to that allowed us to be a good neighbor to her. And I think that's worth doing. Absolutely. Second commandment, after all. Yeah. Yeah.

And, you know, some people are going to go try and track down your email address, but if they're just searching quickly and they click the first thing that says contact, they might do it through Facebook.

And that's really a good reason. So if you have a Facebook page, you can install a Facebook pages app on your phone that will send you those messages. And one of the great things about the pages app is it's just separate from your whole personal Facebook thing. So you're not, if you're trying to ignore your own personal Facebook page, you can at least stay attuned to your business pages, which might include a church page or whatever. We also have the page for this podcast, Waiting Tables on Facebook. It's the same kind of thing. And people can send me messages there and I can access that through the app. And One of the downsides, I would say, of having a Facebook, any of these kind of brand pages is you have to have that linked to a personal page. So I have, I think, four or five brand pages that I run on Facebook. And as a result, I'm basically locked in on having a personal page because you can't delete your personal account and still maintain all of those other things. So it is what it is. But that's the reality. But you were saying before we recorded that you can also control those notifications separately. So you can go on your personal page and say, don't notify me about anything. Don't send me emails. But you can say for your brand page, your church page, please let me know. Yeah, exactly right. And you can also set up multiple administrators.

Right. Yeah. So you can be dealing with those. Exactly. So we have all our elders and deacons who are on Facebook. I just go on and designate them as administrators. But if you have someone else in your church, like you had mentioned, a woman in your church helps run the social media, you can go on and add them as an administrator as well. So that's linked to multiple accounts. So I guess... What kinds of things might a church want to post to Facebook? That's a little bit just up for you to decide, depending on who your church is and various things. You can go out and read articles about this. People have all kinds of crazy recommendations. Someone said, if all else fails, you should just comment on the current events of the day. And I just was thinking, please don't.

Facebook has enough commenting on the current events of the day. We use ours to share our sermons. I think that's a really great use of it.

If you record and upload your sermons, post them on Facebook. And one of, I would say, you know, at least in reformed churches and kind of reformed evangelical Christians, they are really interested in looking for a church. They're interested in what the sermons are like. And so they go, if they're looking for a church, they go listen to sermons. And for our own church, we can post those sermons. And then people in our congregation can go share those sermons and others can hear them. And obviously it's not, it's not all just a big marketing ploy. No, we do want people to hear those and come to our church, but also it's an opportunity for friends of people in our church to hear the gospel and hear the word. And it's such an easy way to do it versus, oh, my pastor preached a good sermon. Let me mail you a cassette tape. Which people did in the past. Right. I remember growing up, my dad got, my parents got cassettes mailed. I don't know if they were every week or every month or something, but cassettes mailed from the church that they had met in mailed to us and they listened to those, which that's just a lot of work. Yeah, we were still shipping out CDs up to about a year ago. Yeah, people ask me for CDs pretty regularly, but nobody has recently, which I'm thankful for. Yeah, the first couple of notes generally put the, I mean, we do the same thing. I mean, our primary weekly posts are, there's two things that pretty much, I think, hit every week.

What, you know, a lead in on Friday or Saturday is to the worship service, what's going to be preached. If so, you know, if we've got a guest speaker, if one of our missionaries is going to be in town, that kind of thing. And then Sunday afternoon or Monday morning, we put up the link to the sermon audio, the sermon. Yep. Yeah. And yeah, I just, I think there's basically no reason other than it takes some work to not just go and share your sermons. If you're posting your sermons online, Facebook is a great place for making them available and making them shareable. We don't really have a strategy or overarching thing, but I'll just post scripture passages here and there on ours. And I know some churches will share articles from various places.

We largely just share if something our pastor has written or maybe something from our denominational website. But we don't use it a whole lot as a, I guess, kind of educational thing of making lots of articles, various things. Yeah, I mean, it kind of ties into what your core online strategy is. And if you are running a really active website and you've got a pastor or pastors blogging and you've got content three or four times a week, well then, yeah, that should be going to every social network. You can think of whether you've got people there or not. But, you know, in our particular case, you know, that's not the purpose of our website.

And we just don't have that much blogging going on. And, you know, my opinion is, you know, the members should take the, you know, the information that we have and that we do post and reshare it and be sharing in their own lives and their social media. You know, something somebody said to me was, you know, is there enough evidence on your social media page to convict you of being a Christian? And, you know, that's what we try and encourage our folks to do is go out there and be a Christian in the social sphere where you are and take the here's information to comment on and have at it. I'm going down a rabbit hole, but one of my friends who's a minister who's actually decided not to be on Facebook at the moment, but at various times he's tried to use Facebook to really engage with people. And it's easy to be critical of social media and just think that people just argue all the time and post dumb things or whatever. But his take was there's a sense in which social media is like going to the street corners and sharing the word with people. It is. It's actual people behind these profiles, right? So just because the medium is different doesn't mean they're not people with souls who need to hear the word. So it's worth thinking about.

And I think also I have some kind of meta points at the end I'd like to talk about. But one of those is the reality is social media also can help us. The electronic media can help us to engage with people in real life. Like, I mean, you were saying you discovered your church online and we don't want to encourage people to just have some kind of online church life altogether. There are online churches these days and I frown towards that, but you can use these things to let people know, hey, we're real people. We have a real building and we want you to come be here with us. Right. And while simultaneously saying, hey, you're a Christian in wherever, rural South America, and you have access to Facebook through your smartphone, and we would love for you to hear our sermon simultaneously. So there are a lot of good that can come out of all these things. A slightly awkward topic is the reality that Facebook allows you to review pages.

And this is the same with Google Maps. And I don't really have a good way to think about this for our church. But the fact is, at least people of my generation, and I partially say that because one time my mom told me she never noticed the stars on Amazon. And I was like, wait, someone doesn't look at the reviews on Amazon? I was like, that's how I make all my decisions in life. So I don't know if it's true for everyone, but people of my generation look at reviews online and think about that as we're making decisions. That's why a lot of businesses really encourage you. Oh, if you enjoy this, if you enjoy this restaurant, please go leave a review because it can mean a lot to them.

And for better or worse, churches allow you to have reviews. And I'm looking at our church's page. We have 13 five-star reviews, one four-star review. But that one said we are a welcoming and warm congregation. So not sure why we missed the last star. But then we have two one-star reviews, which I have no idea what to say about that. or what to do about that. But it's possible you want to encourage people in your church to go leave reviews just because people do see that and think about it. But it just seems awkward and odd to me. It is strange. Yeah, I was just reviewing the one one-star that we have on ours, and yeah, okay, that guy just hates churches. Yeah, and the people who— Look through his Facebook post. He has nothing good to say about church as a general— Right. The one-star reviews I have appear to just be kind of spam for our church.

But if people leave five-star reviews, and I guess on Facebook, you don't even actually have to leave a review. You can just rate something without leaving any. and but it shows up so i don't know it's a weird weird topic but it's worth being aware of if you get um whatever for whatever reason you end up with a bunch of one-star reviews it's going to have a negative impact which is it's just the awkward reality of that same on google uh i don't know but any review system is subject to that and gaming and yeah you know so any kind of a campaign you get on the wrong side of the wrong group in your town and boy yeah which is yeah i mean that's.

I mean, that's a reasonable thing for a church to expect to happen at some point. Yeah, and if it turns out you're on the wrong side of the crowd, you probably should be. Where does a badge honor right so and i guess the speaking of gaming the the final thing i would have to say about facebook is um facebook so there's all this kind of talk in the news facebook uses these algorithmic news feeds so your news feed is not just things shown in time order but it's based on whatever fancy things that they're doing behind the scenes um and and one of the things they do is with these pages is they basically try to get you to pay money to promote your posts. So they show up higher in people's pages. And we've done this a couple of times if we're having a conference, uh, which I guess another thing you can do on Facebook is you can make an event page, which I highly recommend if you're having a conference or something, go make an event page so people can share that and invite their friends to it. It's very easy to do. Um, and it's a good way to share information, but, um, we don't have a budget set aside for advertising on Facebook, but they don't know that. And they ask me for money constantly.

And a downside for better or worse is they essentially trade money for making your things more visible to people. And so not everyone is going to see everything you post, even if they have liked your page and are following your page, they might not see everything you post. Right. Which is why it's important, I think, to encourage members to utilize your stuff in their own lives online. Right. In terms of like resharing. Resharing. Yeah. I might not see that, you know, Church X posted anything, but, oh, you know, my sister posted something or my friend down the street posted something. Oh, that's where they go to church. Didn't know. Right. Yeah. Totally agree. There's a lot more that can be said about this, but I would just summarize by saying at bare minimum, you should create a Facebook page, put in your basic information, your website, service times, maybe the name of your pastor, and then you should... At least respond to messages if people send messages. And then maybe kind of a secondary thing, if you have someone willing to do it, share your sermons on there.

But I would also say my opinion is don't go crazy. You don't need to post everything in the world on your church's Facebook page. So small and simple is just fine. And I think that's a big improvement, a big step over nothing at all. So a couple other things we've used. One is Twitter. And we don't have a lot of people in our church on Twitter. I use Twitter a lot in my professional life. So it just kind of made sense to me to create a church page.

It's possible to use tools that like auto post something from Facebook onto Twitter. But just to, I guess, back up a little bit, Twitter is a micro blogging site. So you can share these messages of 140 characters at a time. And it's quite popular in certain realms. in my professional world it's big and people use it a lot for sports there's also a lot of churches and like theologians and various things on there um but i would recommend don't just auto post your facebook to there because if the facebook post is longer than the twitter post it gets truncated and uh it really looks for someone who uses twitter a lot it looks like you just don't actually care which it that kind of is not actually caring um so if you're going to use twitter i would say also try to think about using it for what it is which is a good way to share links uh also a great place to share sermons and make them reshareable and then it's a great place to share kind of short pithy things like we share little bible verses on ours here and there um.

And you can also share pictures on all social media these days. Pictures are a big thing. So if you're taking pictures at church events, throw them up there and let them. Be aware they eat into your character count. They don't anymore. They do less or they changed that recently. Oh, did they reduce that? Something about that, but I can't remember exactly. I have one little trick for multi-posting. So, you know, it's, I post to, on business stuff, I post, I think, five different social networks. All the same content at different rates, but we can talk about that at different, it doesn't matter.

But yeah, Twitter's the oddball because it only has the 140 character limit, and I hate to write copy twice. Right. Make your most impactful sentence, the teaser, in the first 140 characters, and then if it's a longer thing, put that after so that it looks good to Twitter, and they're inclined and incented to read more and that it looks right then to everybody on Facebook, Google+, Instagram, whatever. Yeah, I just would say if you're using Twitter, think about the fact that you have less characters to deal with. Yeah, they're only going to see that first bit. Twitter, for whatever reason, has had this reputation and maybe it's what it was early on, but the reputation it got was like, oh, it's just where people talk about what they're eating for lunch. And uh sometimes people do use it for that but um people use it for a lot more and um i i use it as professional networking and just kind of knowledge sharing with colleagues and um.

There's a great post from years ago that John Piper from Minneapolis wrote in 2009, actually, why he was using Twitter. And he said, you know, people can use Twitter for, he says, shortened attention spans, disembodying relationships, luring people away from scripture.

Feeding the fires of narcissism. And he said, you know, all that's true, but we could also use it for, this is a very John Piper sentence, try to fill these media with as much provocative, reasonable, Bible-saturated, prayerful, relational, Christ-exalting, truth-driven, serious, creative pointers to true greatness as you can.

And I think if people are actually wanting to do it well, you can do it well, and it doesn't just have to be filled with drivel and meaninglessness. And in this blog post, which I'll link to in the show notes, which are at waiting-tables.com, he says, can you actually magnify Christ with a thimble full of letters? And then he writes a little kind of snippet that's sort of like a little poetic verse, which saying, you know, I think you can give glory to God even in brief snippets, which, and he also gives the example, look at Proverbs. I mean, Proverbs is, the latter sections of Proverbs are kind of like tweets. They're little short, pithy things. And that's actually something we do sometimes, just share a proverb on Twitter for people to see. Right. I would, again, go back to one of the best things you could do if you're going to do it is share your sermons. And one nice thing is we use sermonaudio.com for our sermons, and they will auto-share straight to Twitter. So I don't even have to post that. As soon as the sermon's posted, it tweets out a link to it. Um, and then others can go and reshare those. Or, um, I think another thing is, you know, just in thinking about presenting your church, if someone goes and Googles you, they might come across these social media pages.

And Twitter is one for that. I think if you are actually using it regularly, people are going to notice. Cause if it says, Oh, the last time you posted was 2011, somebody might be like, well, I guess that's church is dead. They don't actually do anything. So I would say it's one that's worth, if you're going to use it, actually update it regularly, even if it's every week with your sermons. Yeah. And I think that's, you know, you can, you can talk about using Twitter poorly, but at least if somebody finds you and sees that you're active, it's proof of life, right? Yeah. So, and it doesn't really have the same kind of, um, directory. So with Facebook, I think you really can just create a profile on leave it without posting, but Twitter is one, just the way it's set up. If you're not using it actively, It just looks kind of dusty. And I would suggest if you're not going to use it, shut down the account probably. But if you are going to use it, try to update it regularly. Yeah, you know, you can go look around how different churches use it, but people do. And there are people out there. Again, these are usually, maybe not always, but usually people on the other end of these Twitter accounts.

And you can choose to use it in a God-glorifying way or not. But in most demographics, it's going to be a less commonly used thing than Facebook. And I think one of the things, too, on Twitter is because it's such a it's a rapid fire stream. It's it is a stream of content. So if you're going to post, go ahead and post that thing up. You know, you've got something you post on Monday to Facebook. Well, it's bad etiquette on Facebook to post it every the same thing every day. Well, it's not bad etiquette. Yeah. And actually is augments your Twitter feed. Post it every day. Post it twice a day for the whole week. So people just see it flip through as it goes by. Yep. So a third one that's big, and we use Lightly, which is Instagram. And Instagram's owned by Facebook, but people think of it largely as a way to share pictures, which is true. But you can also add a caption to the picture. So we use it to...

Uh, well, partially I use it just to be out there just so, you know, if people are looking for us, they can find us, then they can see something about us, but I'll share some pictures here and there. Like we had a church work day recently and I took some pictures and shared those. My, if we have a special event, I'll photograph that, share some pictures from that. Uh, we have a denominational kind of this day and the history of our denomination. And they usually have a, just a little snippet in a picture. And sometimes I take that and share that on our church's Instagram page, but, um, I don't do it a lot. It's mostly do it cause it's easy to do from my phone. And I just kind of figured why not do it. And a lot of people use it. It's very popular these days. And, um, you can remind people that you're there. And I think it's an opportunity to kind of communicate a little bit about the personality of a church. If someone's wondering if you share pictures and I've thought about doing something like, kind of like here's our family or individual of the week interview somebody share their picture and type a little bio of them or something but that'd be a lot of work so i haven't done that yeah probably be a good idea to get permission and participation now it's more work it's more organization yeah so you use um there are tools that allow you to post to to multiple sites at once like do you use buffer in your work is that or do you yeah i settled on uh actually i use two in tandem.

Okay. But primarily I use Buffer for the scheduling. Yeah. And then I actually use something called Friends Plus Me. Again, yes, it's Google Plus oriented because it does, we were talking before about Twitter versus all the other social medias, is Buffer doesn't do a good job of truncating Twitter messages. It basically, if the message is longer than 140 of characters it drops it on the floor and just sends the picture or the page gotcha, That's unfriendly, but friends and me actually will take my, let's say, 400 character message, truncate off the first 140 characters with the picture with a dot, dot, dot to let you know that there's more.

Which is why I try and construct that first sentence to be what it is. But anyway, not to get too much into technicalities, but it's nice because you can do scheduling You can schedule out. I've got posts scheduled out through the end of the year for my business account, which hits, like I said, five different social networks and I think eight or nine different actual pages because I have a couple of Facebook pages. I have a couple of Google Plus pages. Yeah. Yeah. And so there are those kinds of tools available. And the reason I sort of brought it up right now is Instagram doesn't have any kind of interface for people for those tools to auto post Instagram.

So it all has to be manual. And you can't even post to Instagram through the website. You have to use a phone. But it's out there and a lot of people use it if it's something you want to do. And I guess one other thing I wanted to mention about social networks is there are several different services out there that are sort of like private church social networks. And companies use these also. I've been at companies that try to use them, which are sort of like an internal Facebook just for our church or company. Um, my opinion is that those are probably not worth the hassle in most situations. People don't really want to sign up for yet another thing. Um, and it's work for someone to administer. It might cost money. I, I just, I'd be happy to interview someone if anyone ever hears this and is, uh, runs one of those kinds of things and wants to come on and talk to me about it. I'd be happy to share, but I would say don't really ask people to sign up for something else unless you really need to. Which is one of the motivations of Flocknote, which the last episode, episode two, I interviewed someone from Flocknote, which is a church email and texting service I used. And one of the motivations for them was, look, people don't want to be on another social network, but everybody has an email account or can text. So just communicate with your own congregation, communicate with them and don't try to do yet another thing. Yeah, especially. Yeah.

Don't get me started on Facebook, especially another closed off silo from the internet. Yeah. Yeah. I think it's a generally bad idea. Go to where people already are. Don't try to drag them into something. Just in closing here, I laid out a few thoughts. But one thing that's come across, I hope, is that doing this requires a little bit of thoughtfulness. And you can do it all kind of haphazardly. I would suggest that, you know, you really see social media as a form of communication with your own congregation and with those in your community or whoever. And as my first guest on episode one, Chad said, communicating, even with a church sign, communicating well can be a form of loving people well. Because you're saying, hey, I care about you. And so I'm going to think about how I share this with you or what I share with you. And not just like, oh, here's whatever things blasted out left and right or messages never being responded to or all these various things. So I would say if you're going to do social media, give it some thought and try to think, hey, how can I do this well? And how can I represent my church well?

And one post I looked at about the ultimate church social media strategy, which is what it is. But they said, you know, your church's social media personality also should be an accurate reflection of your church. So if you have a little church of 30 people and you meet in a school gym and, you know, you don't need to hide that. And if people see your church on social media, you would hope that if they show up on Sunday, they're not like totally surprised. Like, oh, this isn't what I expected. You seemed much whatever. Bigger or fancier or anything, just, you know, I think you just go ahead and be what, be who you are and don't try to use social media to hide that or, or to portray who you wish you were. Right. Um, another thing along those lines is all of these social networks these days are very image focused. Uh, Facebook years ago, um, well, I remember when you couldn't even share pictures on Facebook, uh, in the very early days, but years ago, you know, a status message was something that people really stop to look at. And often now if you share something and it doesn't have an image associated with it, just the way it's set up, people are going to scroll right past.

So something you might want to think about is, hey, can we do photography at our church? And even if it's just thinking about, you know, here's our people have smartphones, can we collect pictures from people and share those? Or I'm hoping next week to have an episode about, or in two weeks, have an episode about kind of basic graphic design for churches, which is really, again, just like if you're publishing anything, if you're making a flyer for an event, you're doing graphic design. So maybe you can think about trying to do that well. And if you're sharing images and media on social media, you could just, I guess, kind of shoot yourself in the foot. But if you're just constantly posting like really blurry pictures or whatever, something that looks like it's made in Microsoft Paint. Right. There's so many easy and cheap online tools. There's no reason to have that happen. Yeah, yeah. And yeah, it's just...

Oh, and a good cheap trick on Twitter to get past 140 character limit? Yeah. Have a picture full of text. Yeah, and you can do that. And there are ways to generate those automatically and things.

Yeah, and all of these things are... We can pontificate about the way we would want people to consume media or use their time or all these various things, but we're in the situation we're in. We have the social media we have. So if we're going to use them, you know, I just, it doesn't really help to try to go totally against the flow, I guess. Well, I think the thing to remember is, right, the Romans built Roman roads. And yeah, that allowed the tyrannical army and other terrible things to move quickly throughout Europe. But it also enabled Paul and the apostles to spread the gospel at near light speed. And now we have the Internet highway. And, yep, there's all kinds of hideously terrible things on there. But we should be salt and light and use it to God's purposes. And, you know, now you have a global messaging capability of the gospel on your phone. It's amazing. Tim, thank you very much for coming on. And I hope we'll have you on here waiting tables again soon. It'll be fun. Thank you. It's been fun. Thank you. This is the waiting tables podcast. You can find out more at waiting dash tables.com.
