---
title: "Preventing Child Abuse with Deepak Reju"
date: 2017-11-16
tags:
    - Waiting Tables
    - Podcast
description: "Deepak Reju talks about preventing and responding to child abuse at church."
---

*Waiting Tables Episode 13 with Deepak Reju*

{{< audio src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/waitingtables-media.com/audio/ep-13-preventing-child-abuse-with-deepak-reju.mp3" >}}

### Q. Why did you write this book?

_Deepak_: There are a few reasons why I studied the subject and wrote this book.

First, as a pastor who supervises our children's ministry and youth staff, I was surprised at how little information was available to help us think about preventing abuse in church settings.  And what little was available was out of print.  I read and studied in order to help our local church think about how to build a better firewall to prevent child abuse.

Second, as a pastor of counseling, I once had a chance to talk to Dr. Anna Salter, who is one of the nation's leading experts on sexual offenders.  I asked her about her thoughts on how churches handle sexual abuse...and well, let's just say she was very clear on how churches do a poor job in preventing and responding to child abuse. That put an idea in my head that something needed to be written.

Third, and finally, I was at a conference geared at helping churches prevent child abuse, and I was surprised that the only people speaking were psychologists and lawyers, none of whom had ever worked at a church before.  They said a lot of helpful things, but they were some things I felt like they didn't "get" because they were not coming from the perspective of working on the inside of a church.  Somebody needed to say something from the perspective of a pastor who spends his days laboring inside of a church.

All of these reason conspired together to make me write the book.

### Q. Is child abuse in the church really a problem? Why is it such a pressing need today?

_Deepak_: To get a greater sense of the problem, a quick statistical overview of child abuse is helpful:

* There are approximately 747,000 registered sex offenders in the U.S. alone.
* There are more than 100,000 sexual offenders who fail to report every year.
* As many as one in three girls and one in four boys will be sexually abused at some point in their childhood.
* Approximately thirty percent of all cases are reported to authorities---meaning that seventy percent never get proper attention or prosecution.
* Over 63,000 cases of child sexual abuse were reported in 2010.
* Offenders typically prey on children they know, not strangers. Most perpetrators are acquaintances, but as many as forty-seven percent are family or extended family.
* Almost half (forty-seven percent) of the offenders who sexually assaulted victims under age six were family members, compared with forty-two percent of who assaulted youth ages six through eleven, and twenty-four percent who assaulted juveniles ages twelve through seventeen.
* The Department of Justice reports that children under age twelve make up half of all victims of forced sodomy, forced fondling, or sexual assault with an object.
* Numerous experts have made it clear that sexual predators often have not just one or two victims, but dozens. The Abel and Harlow Child Molestation Prevention Study found that each child molester averages twelve child victims and seventy-one acts of molestation. An earlier study by Dr. Gene Abel found that out of 561 sexual offenders interviewed there were more than 291,000 incidents involving more than 195,000 total victims. This same study found that only three percent of these sexual offenders have a chance of getting caught.
* A 2007 FBI report states the following:
    * One out of five girls will be sexually molested before her eighteenth birthday;
    * One out of six boys will be sexually molested before his eighteenth birthday;
    * One out of every seven victims of sexual assault reported to law enforcement agencies was under age six; and
    * Forty percent of the offenders who victimized children under age six were juveniles (under eighteen).

Appalling, isn't it? A quick glance at the numbers shows how pervasive the problem is. This fills out the Bible's picture of sin with more specifics, helping us to see how common sexual and physical abuse is in our society.


### Q. What does Scripture teach us about preventing abuse and protecting children?

There is plenty in Scripture, where the Bible shows evil nature of abusing someone else -- one example, the rape of Tamar by her brother, Amnon, in 1 Sam. 13.

Churches have a responsibility to steward the gift of children entrusted to them. The disciples shoed them away, but Jesus received them and blessed them (Mark 10:13-16).  The culture of first-century Jerusalem didn't value children, but Jesus saw them as immensely valuable, and so should we.  He said whoever welcomes children in his name shows they also welcome Christ and God the Father (Mark 9:36-37).

Scripture teaches us that God has a special burden for the young, weak, oppressed, and the feeble. So, as stewards of all that he has given us and made, we also should be like God.  Deut 10:18, Isai. 1:17; James 1:27.

### Q. Why are churches particularly vulnerable?

_Deepak_: Consider a few reasons...

_Christians are naive._  Because Christians are generally trusting folks, and sexual abusers know this fact, an offender will take advantage of a churchgoer's trust.

_Christians are ignorant._ Because Christians don't know the extent of the problem, they often don't guard against it. And this makes children vulnerable.

_Abuse of authority._  Child abusers will use positions of authority to gain access to children and abuse them. In the case of one child abuser, he would show up at churches and volunteer to be the children's choir director after the church got to know him.  Sadly, he was not just able to do this once, but several times.

_Easy access to children._ Sexual offenders take advantage of the fact that churches are always looking for help with children's ministry and are often facing shortages of volunteers.  They know the children's ministry staff are over-worked and desperate for help.

These are just a few reasons. There are several others I list in the book.

### Q. How does an incorrect view of grace help put churches at risk?

_Deepak_: If a sexual offender is actually caught, he or she counts on what Dietrich Bonhoeffer referred to as cheap grace---grace that comes freely and with very little cost. Abusers are not dumb. They know that if they cry, offer words of contrition, and promise never to do it again, they are very likely not to have to face significant consequences. Pastors and churches are very forgiving. They are quick to apply the gospel---and very, very slow to apply the consequences that come from the law.

The typical offender will say something like, "I'm soooo sorry (tears rolling down his face). This was wrong; and I promise I will never do this again." He is very emotional and, from the look of it, appears to be broken over his sin. What would you do? I'd venture to say many of us would remind him of God's love for him, let the whole thing go, and put the incident(s) behind us. But sadly, when we do that, we embolden the offender to hurt children again because he got away with it.

### Q. What are some misconceptions about child abusers in the church?

_Deepak_: One of the most common myths about sexual offenders is that they will be strangers who take away your child. Power predators do exist. They scope out playgrounds or other places with kids to abduct children and steal their lives. Jaycee Dugaard knows this reality all too well.

But in church and family settings, our problem is much less often with a stranger than it is with those whose lives regularly intersect with ours: fellow church attenders, childcare workers in the nursery, family members, and neighbors---the people we know, not the people we don't know. Boz Tchividjian, executive director of Godly Response to Abuse in the Christian Environment (G.R.A.C.E.), makes this point: "It is common knowledge that most children are not sexually victimized by strangers. In fact, one study found that only 10 percent of child molesters molest children that they don't know."

Many children are taught from an early age not to talk to strangers. But strangers are not as much of a problem as some who live among us every day. Teaching our children to be wary of strangers can give us a false sense of security. What parents often ignore is the familiar adult who is too friendly with our kids. Consider the following:

* More than eighty percent of the time, victims of child abuse know their abusers.
* Most abuse takes place within the context of an ongoing relationship.
* Some child abusers are married and abuse their own children.

Most children know how to respond to an unwelcome stranger, but they're uncertain what to do when a "safe" adult makes them uncomfortable. Consequently, we will spend much of our time considering how to protect against the "safe" adult who is a persuasion predator.

### Q. What Is the Typical Profile for a Sexual Predator?

Pretend you're taking a multiple choice test. Take a look at the list below and make your best guess at who you think might fit the profile for a sexual offender.

A. A young, single male architect
B. A "soccer mom" with four children
D. A pediatrician
E. A Catholic priest
F. A public school teacher
G. None of the above
H. A and D only
I. All of the above

The correct answer is "H." While single males are the most likely, we can't assume this to be the only type of predator. There are some instances when women get trapped in this perverse sin. Most commonly, one would think of a school teacher who is leading teenage boys astray with inappropriate sexual encounters. But there are other categories of female offenders, including some with sadistic tendencies, and those who are coerced by a male partner to abuse children.

In fact, predators come in all types---single and married; blue and white collar; educated and uneducated; rich, middle class, and poor. In examining a range of sexual offender cases, I've found examples in almost every category of work---college professor, athletic director of a private school, Catholic priest, doctor, lawyer, pastor, and many other professionals. We can't limit sexual offenders to just one generic profile.

### Q. Can you tell us about the type of Predators?

_Deepak_: There are two types of sexual predators---the power predator and the persuasion predator. Both wreak great havoc in the lives of their victims. Both are problematic for police, parents, and the societies in which they live, and they have very different ways of accomplishing their evil ends.

The _power predator_ takes a child by sheer force. He overtakes his victim by overpowering her and forcing her into captivity. You can think in terms of a child grabbed in a park or a schoolyard, dragged into a car, and driven off without the strength or ability to stop the sexual offender.

The _persuasion predator_ uses his personality, charm, and influence to convince others that he is trustworthy, and then at the right time strikes to abuse children. You might think about the illustration of a wolf in sheep's clothing: The wolf intends to harm others but doesn't want them to discover his plans and so puts on the appearance of an innocent sheep.

In church settings we are often less focused on power predators. If you have a good structural set-up in your children's ministry wing (check-in desk, half-doors on classrooms, hall monitors, etc.) and some type of security check-in system, that does a lot to keep the power predator at bay. The persuasion predator is far more likely to infiltrate your church setting.

### Q. How do we train volunteers to prevent abuse?

You need to talk about it, teaching them what it is, teach them how to respond when it happens, and teach them how to care for victims. The following are some basic questions that staff and volunteers need to consider in regards to abuse and neglect:

* What do I do if I suspect or observe that a child has been physically, emotionally, or sexually abused?
* Who is the point of contact at church if I suspect or witness abuse?
* What responsibility do I have to report child abuse and neglect to the police or Child Protective Services (CPS)?
* Are there common characteristics of sexual offenders for which I can be on the alert?
* What happens if a child touches me inappropriately?
* How will the church respond to allegations or admission of child abuse?
* How can I best minister to a child who has been abused or neglected?
* What additional care is required for a child who is in foster care?
* How can I guard myself from accusations?
* What happens if a sexual offender starts attending our church?

An important goal of this training is to develop a healthy level of skepticism among the staff and volunteers. You don't want your staff or volunteers to make false assumptions about child abusers but to be vigilant about protecting kids at all times.

### Q. How do we train parents to prevent abuse?

Parents need to understand the problem of abuse. Ignorance is tantamount to saying, "We don't care" or "We're too busy to think about this." Child abusers are a public hazard, and too many parents assume they are safe.

Children's and youth ministry staff can equip parents by offering classes and reading materials. The first step in helping parents is to make sure they know how to teach and instruct their children. Parents are the primary disciplers of their kids (Deuteronomy 6:4-9; Ephesians 6:1). While sex-education classes can be mandated at public schools, it is a bit more difficult to do this in a church. So, the best strategy in equipping the children about sex is to educate and encourage parents in their primary role as disciplers of their children. Help parents to understand what to say to their kids.

Church staff should help parents to understand the dreadful nature of child abuse and how to fight against it. Teach basic things like answers to the following questions: What are child abusers like? How do they operate? Which children are most vulnerable? What kind of safety skills should your children have? Who should babysit your kids---and who shouldn't? What incorrect assumptions do parents typically make about our children's safety?

Overall, what are pastors, church staff and children's ministry workers expecting from parents? We are asking parents to:

* be more open with their kids about sex;
* teach a positive, redemptive picture about the beauty of sexuality in marriage and the need to stay pure until marriage;
* communicate with their children---again, in a developmentally appropriate way---what abuse is, how to prevent abuse, and what to do if someone hurts or takes advantage of them;
* teach kids not to allow anyone to touch them in areas of their body that are covered by a bathing suit;
* teach children that if they are abused they should keep telling adults until someone takes them seriously.
* teach kids modesty and decorum with one another and with adults;
* teach their kids basic safety skills at home.

### Q. When do we report to the civil authority?

_Deepak_: What standard do we use to decide if we are going to report or not? Many might think you need to have concrete proof, or at least be certain about the abuse before you report. But that sets the standard too high. Rather than waiting until you have reasonable cause to report, you should report as soon as there is reasonable suspicion.

### Q. What are basic principles for caring for abuse victims?

_Deepak_: No matter how much work is involved in sorting through an abusive situation, the church needs to be continually mindful of caring for the victim. As soon as the allegations are revealed and the authorities contacted, care for the child or teenager needs to begin immediately. Don't let victims and their families struggle with the ongoing effects of abuse on their own.

Abuse can have a host of aftereffects on the victims. Victims can act controlling in relationships because they need to feel safe. Others might feel powerless to deal with life because they couldn't stop abuse. Perceptions of body image and identity will be distorted. Victims may talk about themselves in derogatory terms, saying things like, "I am worthless," or, "I am trash." There can be self-destructive acting out with drugs, sex, alcohol, food, or spending, as the victims try to find ways to self-soothe or escape the pain. Self-injury, even mutilation or suicidal ideation, can also be a struggle.

The victims' understanding of God's will and their relationship with God will probably also be severely skewed. When a person who was supposed to protect you betrays you, it makes it very difficult to accept God's love and grace. God will likely be seen as punitive and judgmental rather than accepting or loving. Relationships can be very unstable, with a consistent push-and-pull---sometimes wanting intimacy, other times feeling scared to be close. Trusting others, especially those in authority, is often difficult. It is not uncharacteristic for victims to have a series of very short relationships, not really letting anyone into their life with any depth but continuing to move from relationship to relationship. Therefore, it is your duty as a church to provide whatever spiritual, medical, and emotional support is necessary to bring healing and redemption to these situations.

Churches can often be at a loss in how to help, especially if they have not encountered abuse before. Over the long term, victims need to feel the church's support in many ways; but in the short term, the best thing that a pastor, staff, or members can do is simply to listen. The wounds of abuse are deep, so it will take lots of love to deal honestly with the harm done by the abuser. Let the victims tell their stories and be patient with them, as the healing process can often take a long time.

Apply the gospel very liberally to this child's or teenager's life. When he or she acts out as a result of the abuse, do not apply a regimented law, but give the gospel generously. Help the victim to see that Christ empathizes with his or her sorrow because he too was striped and beaten. He suffered and was hated. Remind him or her of Christ's love for children (Mark 10:13-16) and his warnings for those who do harm to children (Matthew 18:6).

### Links

- [On Guard: Preventing and Responding to Child Abuse at Church](http://amzn.to/2yLBrxa) - Deepak Reju's book

## Transcript



I am joined today by Deepak Raju, who is an associate pastor at Capitol Hill Baptist Church in Washington, D.C. He is the father, I believe, of five children and on the board of directors of the Biblical Counseling Coalition. He is also the author of an excellent book called On Guard, Preventing and Responding to Child Abuse at Church.

I did an episode recently that hopefully many of you have heard. If not, you can go to waiting-tables.com on child abuse. Safety at Church. And this episode is going to be a continuation of that, asking some different questions and taking this from a different angle. This is such an important topic, and I am really thankful to have you here today. Glad to be here. Glad to have the conversation. I just mentioned to you as we were getting started, if I can have one takeaway from this show for people, it would be that if you are involved in leadership at a church, you should probably have a copy of this book on your shelf. It's such an important book, and also practical and not terribly long. So you could read it in a couple sittings and it's worth doing that. Thank you for writing this book. Yeah, very glad to do it. On that note, what motivated you? What was the context for putting this book together? There were really a couple of reasons why. First, as a pastor who supervises the children and youth staff, I was surprised when I first came back on staff here at our church in DC, how little information was available to actually help us think about preventing abuse in church settings.

And what I could find was basically out of print. So I read and studied in order to actually help our church build a better firewall for our children's ministry to prevent child abuse. But then I happened to be in a conversation with Dr. Anna Salter, who's one of the leading experts on sexual offenders. And I asked her her thoughts on churches handling sexual abuse. And let's just say that she was very clear on how she thought churches did a poor job in preventing and then especially responding to child abuse when it occurs. So that planted the idea in my head that something needed to be written. And then finally, I took our children's ministry staff to a conference on preventing child abuse. And what surprised and probably also frustrated me is that everyone who spoke was a psychologist or a lawyer. Not that they didn't have any good things to say. They had lots of good things to say. But there was no one... From the vantage point of a staff member or a deacon or an elder within a church.

Actually speaking up about the issues at the conference. So I just thought somebody who's in the middle of it in a church, who gets how church works, who's got a pastoral heart, should write something about it. And those are reasons. There's more, but those are some of the basic reasons what conspired together to actually make me want to write the book. This is one of those things where there's so much here that applies to churches of all varieties, and there's just a lot of value. If you're independent or Baptist or Presbyterian or whatever, this is going to be a book that's valuable for you. It's such a great resource. So you already alluded to this, but is child abuse in the church really a problem? Is this a big thing today that we need to be spending time on and thinking about and working on? Yeah, it is. And the statistics help us actually get a sense of what's going on. So there are approximately 747,000 registered sexual offenders in the U.S. There are more than 100,000 offenders who fail to actually report every year. As many as one in three girls and one in four boys will be sexually abused at some point in their childhood.

Approximately 30% of all cases are reported to authorities, meaning that 70% never get proper attention or prosecution. Over 63,000 cases of child sex abuse were reported in 2010. Offenders typically prey on children they know, not on strangers. And most predators are actually acquaintances. So you can go on and on and on about the numbers, but the numbers paint a pretty glaring picture that there is a problem out there and that we've got to actually deal with it. I looked at one FBI report that said one out of five girls will be sexually molested by their eighth birthday, and one out of six boys will be sexually molested before his 18th birthday.

And one out of every seven victims of sexual assault reported to law enforcement agencies was actually under the age of six. You know, those numbers, you just think, man, it's appalling. When you look at it, how much is going on out there because the problem is pervasive and you fill it out with a biblical picture of sin and you see you shouldn't be surprised that there is going to be sexual and physical abuse common in our society. And we'll talk about this more later. But one of the temptations as Christians is to say, well, that happens, but that's not going to happen in my church. I know the people in my church, they're nice and we've gone back a long time and so that can't happen. But the reality is it's happening inside of churches as well. And what a tragedy for that to happen. So I did an episode on the same topic not too long ago with Josh Navy, who's a pastor at the Summit Church here in the Raleigh area. And we talked about the question of what does Scripture particularly mean? Teach us about preventing abuse and protecting children. But I think it's worth going back to that to remember that we do have a scriptural imperative to take care here. A couple of things I'd say to that. There's plenty in scripture where the Bible shows the evil nature of abusing someone else. So one practical example, the rape of Tamar by her brother Amnon in 1 Samuel 13.

And the tragedy of David's response since he's king and responsible for justice and his lack of doing anything in that.

And then so churches also have a responsibility to steward the gift of children trusted to them. And you think of Jesus in Mark chapter 10, how the disciples shooed the children away. And yet what did Jesus do? He received them and blessed them. It's striking that in first century culture in Jerusalem, they didn't place much value in children, but Jesus, being radical as he always is, placed immense value on children. And if that's what Jesus does, then we should also. In Mark chapter 9, Jesus says, whoever welcomes children in his name shows that they also welcome him and God the Father. So, that starts adding up the picture. But, you know, a larger picture, if you think of a God throughout scripture, you see he has a special burden for the young, for the weak, the oppressed, and the feeble. And as stewards of all these kinds of people in our own congregations, we want to be like God. So a couple of references would be Deuteronomy 10.18 and Isaiah 1.17 and James 1.27 all point to this idea.

I could go on, but that gives you some sense of why Scripture not only says that abuse is evil, but we have a responsibility to both steward and protect children. One of the most eye-opening portions in the book for me was when you laid out why churches are particularly vulnerable to abuse happening. And it was frightening to me in some ways that we could have overlooked some of the same things. But can you talk about that a little bit? Why are churches particularly vulnerable to these things? A couple of reasons. Christians are naive on this issue of abuse because Christians are generally trusting folks. And sexual abusers know that fact. They're going to try and take advantage of churchgoers, take advantage of their trust. And then Christians are ignorant. So many of them don't know the extent of the problem. and because they don't know the extent of the problem, they don't guard against it. Like we don't guard against things that we don't know about.

And that makes children all the more vulnerable. And then sadly, abusers know that they can actually get into positions of authority and gain access to children and abuse them. So there was one case that was pretty startling of a child abuser who would show up at churches and volunteer to be the children's choir director after a church got to know him. And what was sad about the situation is he didn't do it just once. He did it multiple times at different churches and had access to children every time. And then the easy access to children. So children's ministry is often a place where they're desperate for volunteers.

They're short on help. And so they're willing to lower the bar to get people in to help watch over the kids. But that desperation, the sexual offenders know, they know that the children's ministry staff are overworked and desperate for help. So they're going to take advantage of that. That's a few reasons. I could actually give more and I list more in the book, but that gives you some of a sense why churches are vulnerable. And I would again say, don't take, let all of this podcast be an introduction to the book for you and then go and pick up the book. And I'm not making any money off the sales of the book. So that's all coming from me having appreciated it and benefited from it. Let this just be an introduction for you as you're listening. When I was a teenager, a guy showed up at the small church I grew up in and was around for a few weeks. And then he told my dad and the other elders at the church that God had called him to take over the youth ministry at our church.

And I remember I didn't know that much about the situation, but I know that my dad and the other elders were clear in response that that was not sufficient grounds for them for determining God's will. And I don't remember what happened to that guy, but I remember that in hindsight and I'm thankful for their clear response to that, because I think the needs are so great. Every church practically needs more help with nursery and children's ministry. But that doesn't mean we can just not get to know people and know about people and also put practices in place to prevent things from happening. How does an incorrect view of grace, in particular, help put churches at risk? Grace is centered to the gospel. Grace is centered to our faith. But if you want to picture the situation, if a sexual offender actually got caught, and he or she counts on what Dietrich Bonhoeffer often referred to as cheap grace.

Grace that comes freely and with very little cost. And we know abusers aren't dumb. They know that if they cry and offer words of contrition and promise never to do anything again, they're very likely not to have to face significant consequences. And pastors and churches are very forgiving and want to be very forgiving. So they quickly apply the gospel. But they're very, very, very slow to apply the consequences that come from the law. So a typical offender is going to say, I'm so sorry. And you want to picture tears rolling down their face. It is wrong, and I promise I'll never, ever, ever do this again. And the offender is emotional, and from the looks of it, he looks very broken.

What are most of us going to do? I mean, most of us are going to see this broken, contrite man, and I venture to say many of us would remind him of God's love, and let the thing go, and try and put the incident behind us. And you find that happening often in churches. But sadly, when we do that, we actually embolden the offender to hurt children again, because Because they got away with it. Yeah. And that's the scary thing, that they got away with it. And so why would they stop? And when you find out what offenders do, it's not offending once.

Or twice, typical offenders offend many, many times because they get away with it and they're emboldened then to actually take greater risks and do even more. Right. And a correct view of grace doesn't require us to always be willing to return someone who has fallen into sin and into areas where do they be greatly tempted to that same sin? Yeah, a correct view of grace does not eradicate the natural consequences for our sin. It doesn't throw it out and eliminate it. So a correct view of grace balances the law actually with grace. And that's a fuller, that's a full picture of the gospel. What are some of the misconceptions about child abusers in general and what child abusers might look like in the church? In the book, you outlined that a child abuser may well not fit the image that we have in our heads. Yes, here's some of the misconceptions.

First, there's a common myth that sexual offenders are actually going to be strangers who take away the child. And while strangers do exist, and they scope out playgrounds and other places to abduct children, in a church setting, our problem is much less often with the stranger, so the person we don't know, but actually the The problem is with the people who we intersect with in our lives, fellow church attenders, child care workers and nursery family members, neighbors. So it's the problem is with the people we know, not the people we don't know. So there's a myth of stranger danger that pervades the thoughts and conversations that people have about who child abusers are. Uh, uh, Boz, um, who is the executive director of grace, godly response to abuse in Christian environments has made this point. It's calm. It's says, quote, it's common knowledge that most children are not sexually victimized by strangers. In fact, one study found that only 10%.

You know, many children are actually taught from an early age not to talk to strangers, but strangers are not as much a problem as some people who live think they are. Teaching our children to beware of strangers actually is a good thing, but it can actually give them a false sense of security. What parents often ignore is the familiar adult who is too friendly with our kids. So just consider the following. More than 80% of the time, victims of child abuse know they're abusers. Most abuse takes place within the context of an ongoing relationship. And some child abusers are married and abuse their own children. So most children know how to respond to an unwelcome stranger. But where they get into a quandary is they're uncertain what to do when a safe adult makes them uncomfortable or actually take steps of advancing on them in ways that obviously are no longer safe. So that's the first thing I would say in terms of misconceptions, the myth of the stranger danger. But the second thing you want to consider is just like the typical profile. So let me give you a multiple choice test. And I want you to guess...

With your best guess, who you think the profile of the sexual offender is. It's A, a single man who's a male, who's an architect. B, a soccer mom with four children. C, a pediatrician. A D, a Catholic priest. E, a public school teacher. Or F, none of the above. So what do you think, Tim? Which one? Despite having been a single male for a long time, I would probably first guess maybe a single male. Single males are actually the most likely, but the danger is assuming, which I think a lot of people do, just like you did and I do, that this is the only type of predator. But what you find is that there are some instances when women get trapped into this perverse sin. And one would commonly think about, say, the school teacher leading to teenage boys astray and inappropriate sexual encounters. You get occasionally accounts on the news of this kind of thing.

But the hard thing to find out is when you looked at the different cases, you find And that actually when female offenders are found, some of them actually have very sadistic tendencies and are coerced by male partners to actually abuse children. But what you find out is predators come in all types. So the correct answer, which I didn't give you, would be all of the above. So there's single and married, blue collar and white collar, educated and uneducated, rich, middle class, poor. And when we examined the different kind of cases of sexual offenders, we found something in almost every category of work. So we found a college professor, athletic director in a private school, Catholic priest, a doctor, a lawyer, a pastor, and many, many, many, many, many, many, many other professionals. So we couldn't limit the sexual offenders to just this one generic profile. Another helpful category for me in the book, connecting to what you just described about so often child abusers are. Are not strangers, but are maybe even relatives or people who know the child. In the book, you talk about two types of predators, one being a power predator and one being a persuasion predator.

Those have been helpful categories in our own churches. The other deacons and I have thought about protecting our children and setting up systems. Can you describe those and talk about how those are useful categories? The two types of predators, sexual offenders, power predator, and persuasion predator, as you mentioned. They both wreak great havoc in the lives of victims. Both are problematic for police and parents and societies we live in, so they are both public hazards. But they have very, very, very different ways of accomplishing their evil ends. So the power predator takes a child by sheer force, and he overtakes his victim by overpowering her and forcing her into captivity. So you've got to think in terms of a child grabbed in a park or a schoolyard and dragged into a car and driven off without any strength or ability to stop the sexual offender. You know, the news reports had this a couple of years back where they caught this on a street camera where there was a child, a girl, probably early elementary, walking with her brother, who was also in early elementary, and they were walking down the street together. And you actually saw a truck pull up next to them.

And a man jumped out and tried and grabbed the girl. And she was wrestling with him. And her little brother that was standing next to her was screaming. And after a couple of minutes of wrestling, the guy gave up and jumped back into his truck. And they ran down the street. But the scary thing about that was then you saw him following him down the street in his truck. So, you know, they caught that on video.

That's a scary thing. And it's a reality in a fallen world. So best-selling author and risk assessment expert Gavin DeBecker describes this in this way. He says, quote, The power predator charges like a bear, unmistakably committing to his act. Because of this, he cannot easily retreat or say there was merely a misunderstanding. Accordingly, he strikes only when he feels certain he'll prevail, end quote. So that's the power predator. the persuasion predator uses his personality and charm to influence and convince others that he's truly worthy. And then at the right time strikes to abuse children. So you might think of the illustration, instead of a bear, with a persuasion predator, we think of a wolf in sheep's clothing. The wolf intends to harm others, but doesn't want them to discover his plans, so he puts on the appearance of an innocent sheep. In the church setting, we're less focused on the power predators. So if you have good structural setup in children's ministry, like a check-in desk and half doors and hall monitors and some type of security check-in system that doesn't allow strangers to come in. And that does a lot to keep the power predator at bay. So what we're focused on often more in a church setting is the persuasion predator. That's the person that's far more likely to infiltrate our church. Yeah, that's been really helpful for us because I think the temptation.

If you just start to think about this problem, the temptation is to think mostly about the power predator because that's kind of the scary thing that's on TV.

But when you realize that, it's probably often a smaller problem. It changes to some extent how you think through this and realize that there's a very wicked other type of predator who we have to be aware of. I had not really thought a lot about that prior to reading this book and it's been a helpful category for us. So there's a lot more on all of this and we don't have time to go into depth about it. So let's shift a little bit and talk about how do we train volunteers to prevent abuse? That's obviously a big question, but I think that's one that a lot of churches are asking. There's a lot that you need to think about in that regard. You want to talk about abuse. You want to teach them what it is. You want to teach them how to respond to it. You want to teach them how to care for victims. So some examples of questions I think staff and volunteers need to consider in regards to abuse and neglect. Like, what do I do if I suspect or observe that a child has been physically or sexually abused? Who's the point of contact in my church if I actually witness something or suspect something? What responsibility do I have to report, whether it's to police or child protective services? Are there common characteristics of offenders? What happens if a child touches me inappropriately? How does the church respond to allegations or admissions of child abuse?

How can I best minister to a child who's being abused or neglected? There's lots of questions that you need to consider in a church setting as you're trying to consider how to help volunteers. I think the most important goal in training is actually to help them develop a healthy level of skepticism.

So I don't want staff and volunteers to make false assumptions about child abusers, but I need them to actually be vigilant about protecting the kids at all times. So, you know, what does a healthy skepticism involve? You don't want to make your workers paranoid that there's basically a predator lurking around every corner. But you don't want them to carelessly assume that just because someone's a self-professing Christian, it's perfectly fine to actually give them the responsibility for your kids. So, you know, I often give this example of, say you're in a children's ministry setting, and there's a single guy named Jonathan. And he's been at the church for several years, and he does all the screening, and he then begins to volunteer. And in the classroom, they need somebody to take a child to the restroom, so Jonathan volunteers. And that might not set off any alarm bells, and it doesn't necessarily have to, because, you know, Jonathan might be standing in front of a kid who's screaming at the top of his lungs that he has to go to potty. And so what most adults are going to do is they're going to rush the kid to the bathroom.

Because they're worried they're going to have an accident. But the question is, what if child care training made very clear that only women are supposed to take children to the bathroom? If that was really clear in the training in our policy, then we'd have to be a degree more suspicious. And then if it happened only once, then that doesn't have to be that big of a deal, because Jonathan may not have been listening to the policy when we taught him that, or he might be standing in front of a screaming four-year-old kid who's saying, I'm going to wet my pants. And so out of fear, he rushes the kid to the bathroom. But if Jonathan repeatedly takes the kid to the restroom and ignores the rules, that's when your alarm bells need to settle. That's where you'd want to volunteer not to just simply pass over it and say, oh, he just probably forgot about the rules. That's where your healthy skepticism actually kicks in and should lead you to, as a volunteer, to say something to the staff to make them aware of that. And if a volunteer senses that something might be going wrong.

The last thing they should do is dismiss it or ignore it. They just need to be wise and sensitive to the Holy Spirit's direction and then think about what happened and think about how to respond to it. Which similarly means the church needs to have means of someone raising those things. If a volunteer has concerns, it needs to be clear as to who they can share that with and the people who are supposed to hear that need to be ready to hear that in an appropriate way and then act on it if need be. I mean, there's more that has to go into place for that to work well. I think a really important aspect here is the involvement of parents. Can you talk a little bit about what parents can do to prevent abuse? A couple of basic things in regards to parents. Child abusers are a public hazard, and too many parents assume that their children are safe. So their ignorance is tantamount to saying we don't care or we're just too busy to think about this. Children's ministry and youth ministry staff can actually do a number of things. So, for example, they can equip parents by offering classes or reading materials. The first step, I think, is making sure the parents know how to teach their children and instruct their children. So, we often teach about how parents are the primary disciples of their kids.

Deuteronomy chapter 6 and Ephesians 6.1. And so, we don't do, for example, sex education classes in church. That may be mandated in public schools, but it's difficult to do in a church setting. So, our best strategy is actually equipping the parents to know how to speak to their children. And I think that's the baseline for this whole conversation. You can't really talk to them about abuse and how to deal with abuse without that baseline. I think some parents can rush to do that, say, you know, instruct their kids a few things about abuse, but they leave out the whole category of sexuality, and that's a tragedy in not helping your kids to understand the beauty of what God has created in terms of sex. It helps you understand then the tragedy of what then child abuse actually is and how to fight against it. But then the church can help parents understand the dreadful nature of abuse and then actually how to fight it and teach them basic things about it like, who are child abusers, how do they operate, which children are most vulnerable, what are safety skills that kids should have, you know, how do you handle babysitters? Who should be your choice of babysitters?

And what are some of the incorrect assumptions that we make? And my goal is then to have a congregation full of parents who are ready to know what to do when abuse happens, that they're not ignorant or reactive or caught off guard, but they're actually prepared. And, you know, I mentioned a moment ago, one important step is for parents to talk to their children about sex. In order for them to understand what's wrong, child abuse, children need to understand what's right, a healthy, God-glorifying biblical view of sexuality. I think too many children grow up in church hearing the message that sex is wrong, but they don't understand God's beautiful gift in it. And if kids don't understand it from their parents, it's because sometimes parents are too scared to talk about it. So as a counselor, how many grown adults coming to me with their problems as we talk about their life reflect on the fact that their parents basically never talked to them about this. And rather than doing that, having actually an open conversation with your kids so that when they run into trouble or they're confused about all this, they can come to you.

That's fundamental in terms of what we want to do. So what are we asking parents to do? I'm asking our parents fundamentally to be more open with their kids about the whole subject of sexuality, to actually teach them a positive redemptive picture of the beauty of sex in marriage and needing to stay pure until marriage, to communicate with their children in a developmentally appropriate way what abuse is and how to prevent abuse. What to do if someone actually hurts them or takes advantage of them, and to teach kids not to allow anyone to touch them in areas of their body that are actually covered by a bathing suit, to teach children that if they're abused, they should keep telling adults until someone actually takes them seriously.

To teach kids modesty and decorum with one another in adults and to teach kids the basics, safety skills, both at home and abroad. That seems basic, but it's probably not happening in a lot of homes where it should be. And I would encourage parents to take a role here and it'll benefit your children, not just in church, but in other situations and in all of their lives. Something I think probably churches have often gone wrong in is deciding when to report allegations of abuse to the civil authority. What is your take on when that should happen? Yeah, it's a hard question because there's a lot of churches who are highly reluctant to report, and yet we want to encourage them to do that, especially when abuse occurs in their context. So, you know, what standard do we use to decide if we're going to report or not? Many might think you need to have concrete proof or at least be certain about the abuse before you report, but that sets a standard too high. So rather than waiting until you have responsible cause to report, you need to report as soon as there's reasonable suspicion. So rather than, I said responsible, sorry, rather than reasonable cause, you're looking for reasonable suspicion. To help define that term, reasonable suspicion.

Safety expert Beth Swagman actually says, and there's a quote, a reasonable person, this is what reasonable suspicion is.

A reasonable person seeing a similar bruise or hearing a similar story would come to a similar understanding about the probable cause of the bruise and assault. Reasonable suspicion doesn't imply an actual knowledge or certainty that as in, I know for sure it happened. Instead, reasonable suspicion suggests that reasonable people have sufficient general knowledge of inappropriate interactions to be suspicious that a particular incident occurred.

So if you have that kind of suspicion, common sense makes you think that it's highly likely that something went wrong, then you need to consider reporting. You entered that category of, I need to say something. And the first level of reporting is usually within the congregation to the person who's designated to handle reports of abuse and to start a conversation with them and the leadership of the church. But then the law actually requires us, if there is actual abuse that we know for sure is going on, that it's mandatory to actually then go ahead and report about the abuse. And many, many, many churches are scared to going to authorities outside of the church and would rather handle this within a church. I would be willing to say a lot of churches have gone wrong in attempting to handle that and have made situations much worse. And it's worth, I think, for church leadership teams, elders, or however you're organized to have a clear decision and policy in place as to how you're going to handle this. So that when it does come up, you are able to say, okay, this is.

This is, we need to report it at this point and not wait until someone is suggesting it to decide what your policy is. Oh yeah. Very much so. Like the sad thing about it is a lot of churches are reactionary and have a fly by the seat of their pants, figuring it out when it happens approach. So if I can, you know, since writing the book, if I can only tell you the number of churches that end up calling in the midst of the crisis, when it hits. Yeah.

And that's when, you know, how many times now have I heard the pastor go, well, I have your book on my bookshelf, but I never bothered reading it. Right. I wish I had read something. So I don't really care if they read my book. What I care more importantly is that they get a policy in place beforehand so that when something actually happens, they have a set of procedures and guidelines of knowing how to respond. You oversee children's ministry, and you also do a lot of pastoral counseling there. And if I can ask you to talk briefly about basic principles for caring for abuse victims, I'm aware that is maybe many semesters in seminary kind of answer. But are there some basic guidelines that you can share? There's a couple of basic things. The most important thing you do for a victim is you take time to just simply listen to their story. And I can't overemphasize that because many victims are ignored, overlooked, discarded. The most fundamental thing you ever do for a person who's hurting is you give them a chance to tell their stories and you be patient with them as they begin to work through some kind of healing process.

So, you know, any kind of victim that you're dealing with, you want to apply the gospel very liberally to a child or teenager's life. If Victor Vieth has said, a famous lawyer who deals with child abuse, the gospel may be the only tonic the abused child has never experienced. We want to help the victim see Christ empathizes with their sorrow and he too was stripped and beaten and he suffered and he was hated and remind him or her of Christ's love for children.

And his warnings against those who harm children. That's Mark chapter 10 and Matthew 18. And so you want to patiently listen and apply the gospel liberally. And you want to do things like you want to untangle the distorted ways that abusers, for example, use religion to confuse children. Abusers take positions of authority in churches and use religious language to distort the whole thing. And that's many times how they get away with things within churches. You want to be careful not to use platitudes or superficial application of scripture for children because they know when you're doing that and they don't need trite answer. But you also want to make a clear moral declaration that the abuse was wrong. The power of someone who loves them that says, that cuts through the confusion they experience and says what that person did to you was wrong and none of this is your fault. And then helping them sort through forgiveness is really important because the abuse can poison their heart with bitterness and anger. And yet you want to be careful not to recklessly press into victims the need for forgiveness and force them to come to a quick decision. Recognizing that forgiveness is a process over the course of time. So you regularly pray for victims and you don't want to lose sight of the families because it's not just the victim, it's the family that's hurting. So you want to minister to the entire family.

That's all in the initial stages in the first few months as you're helping. But one of the things that I think you lose sight of is the hurt that they experience, especially if it's been abuse over the course of time. It goes deep and lasts for a long, long time. So one practice that I've seen a lot of churches do that is useful is appointing an advocate, someone who will be a liaison between the victim and the leadership of the church, to keep putting the interest of that victim in front of the leadership, to keep staying in touch with them and caring for them. So long after the heat around a situation has died down, let's say someone was abused, but abuser was taken to trial and tried and taken to court and put in prison. What's sad is then in the months after that, when the heat has dissipated, people can forget about the victim. And so you want a long-term strategy too in doing that. And the last point, which is important, is just making sure that the victims get adequate and counseling, help, and care from a competent and loving and gracious counselor. And not just throwing anyone at them. Again, Victor Veith has warned an incompetent counselor may be worse than no counselor at all.

So making sure that they get the kind of adequate help they need because the wounds and hurt from abuse run deep and you want to make sure that they have someone that can work with that, has experience in it, and can love them over the long haul. That's really valuable. That's helpful for me. And I think related to the earlier point, this is a great thing to start to think about and know, have some idea of how you'd handle it even prior to the situation happening. And you can do that with the prayer that you will never be in a situation where you have someone in your church who is abused. But sadly, it's likely and you should have some idea of what you're going to say and how you're going to handle it ahead of time.

Do you have any concluding thoughts for us as we wrap up? I just want to say I appreciate the time. I want to encourage pastors to think deliberately about this and help pastors especially know that supporting your children's minister as you sort through these things is really important because they can be lost on their own trying to sort through and figure out how to do this. Pastor Reju, I really appreciate you coming on and talking to me and more broadly taking on such a solemn and difficult topic to write about. It's even hard. It's been hard for me to listen to just thinking about these things happening. And I really appreciate your willingness to take this on. And I would, again, commend people. Go out and get this book and don't leave it on your shelf. Read through this book. Buy it for all the leadership at your church and read through it. it will be valuable for you. Thank you for coming on the Waiting Tables podcast. Yeah, really happy doing it. I appreciate the time with you today.
