---
title: "Basics of Church Audio Equipment"
date: 2017-08-10
tags:
    - Waiting Tables
    - Podcast
description: "I talk with Todd Messer about the basics of church audio equipment for recording and amplification."
---

*Waiting Tables Episode 6 with Todd Messer*

{{< audio src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/waitingtables-media.com/audio/episode-6-church-audio.mp3" >}}

In this episode, I speak with Todd Messer, teacher and technology coordinator at a Christian school in New Jersey.  Todd is also an active member of his local church, where he volunteers his skills serving in audio.  We delve into the nitty gritty of church audio equipment and recommend some ways you can determine what sort of system best fits your church's audio needs.

In order to determine what type of audio equipment would best fit your church's needs, consider the goals you have for your audio equipment:

1. What kind of amplification do you need?
    * Does your church have 30 members or 500 members? What size is your auditorium? What are the acoustics in the building like?
2. Do you plan on broadcasting or recording your audio content?

The key, necessary components of an audio system are as follows:

* Input- a microphone
* Output- a speaker
* An amplifier and/or mixer

Some speakers have amplifiers built in; you may only have an input and output with a built in amplifier.

Consider the following to help you determine what sound system setup will best fit your needs:

The amount of amplification you need depends on the size of your room, the acoustics of the room. Whatever you choose, ensure that your amplifier is more powerful than what your amplification needs will be.  It is always better to underutilize the capacity of your amplifier than to push an amplifier to its max.

Are you in a temporary or permanent meeting situation? Do you need a portable sound system or can you set up something permanent?

Consider the amount of inputs you will need.  Does your church have an elaborate band with multiple instruments? Does your church regularly have multiple people involved throughout the service? How many microphones will be necessary?  The size and type of mixer that you select will determine the amount of inputs and outputs you can use simultaneously.

Beware the wattages if you use an amplifier that is separate from your speakers! You can easily destroy your speakers or set your amplifier on fire if your amplifier is too powerful for your speakers' capacity. Always ensure that your speaker capacity is greater than your amplifier capacity.

Also consider: are you going to need to route your sound somewhere? Do you want the service audio to be piped into the church lobby? What about the nursery?

Beware of what your microphone needs are.  Will a stationary microphone be sufficient for your style of service and the presenting style of your pastor? Does your pastor move around a lot?

Are you planning to record your services? Where will you position the recording device? Consider the fact that depending on where you place it, nearby sounds may be picked up on the recording.  If you put the recorder on the pulpit, it may pick up every time your pastor turns a bible page, every time his wristwatch clinks, every time he grasps the podium.

Here are some tips, once you've determined your audio needs:

* With microphones, you get what you pay for.
* [Shure](http://www.shure.com/) microphones have a great reputation; they make very good products. You can count on it to work and it's reasonably affordable for how high end it is.
* [AudioTechnica](http://www.audio-technica.com/world_map/ "Audio-Technica Corporation") is a good name that is less expensive than Shure.
* [Mackey](http://mackie.com/) is also a good name.
* [Zoom](http://amzn.to/2fuIQMv) is a great brand for digital recorders.
Good brands to look into with amps are Crown and QSC.
* If you're looking for ways to learn more about audio equipment, look for volunteer opportunities at smaller local schools or other organizations to pick up tips and tricks
* If you plan on recording your audio, redundancy is important.  You may want to have a backup recorder running simultaneously to a primary recorder so that if there is some malfunction, you have a fall-back recording.
* Use the best quality microphone you can afford as the input for your recordings.  It will make a huge difference in the overall quality of your recordings.

### Links

- [Mackie Thump Series Powered Loudspeakers](http://mackie.com/products/thump-series)
- [Fender Passport Event PA System](http://amzn.to/2vpQUCa) - Great all-in-one mixer/amplifier/speaker system
- [Shure MX412 & MX418 Gooseneck Microphones](http://www.shure.com/americas/products/microphones/microflex/mx412-mx418-gooseneck-microphones) - Excellent pulpit microphone.
- [Shure SM58 Vocal Microphone](http://amzn.to/2fvj9LT) - Simple, quality microphone used around the world.
- [Shure WBH53T Headworn Vocal Microphone](http://amzn.to/2vlRQJm) - Headworn Microphone to use with Shure SLX.
- [Shure SLX](http://www.shure.com/americas/products/wireless-systems/slx-systems) - Wireless Mic Transmitter/Receiver Systems
- [Zoom Recorders](http://amzn.to/2fuIQMv) - Best-in-class digital recorders
- [Mackie PROFX16V2 16-Channel 4-Bus Compact Mixer](https://www.amazon.com/Mackie-PROFX16V2-16-Channel-Compact-Effects/dp/B00VWKQP9C) - Excellent, affordable mixer (non-powered)

## Transcript



Of the Waiting Tables podcast. Today, I'm joined by Mr. Todd Messer. Todd is a teacher and the technology coordinator at a Christian school in New Jersey and an active member of his church where he volunteers and helps with many things, including helping with the church audio and recordings and audio equipment. Todd has a background in radio, actually, and has learned a lot about audio and recording through there. Todd and I actually have an interesting history in podcasting. We were on a podcast together in 2006, long before podcasting was cool, called The Wolverine Review. It's good to be back with you, Tim. And you're right, that whole podcasting thing. I mean, what a great chapter in our lives. But I still remember, actually, it's sad because you and I both know we don't have the recordings anymore. But I managed to, I have this clip somewhere on one of my computers of us actually doing an audio test for a podcast when we were on, I think it was Christmas break. It may have been Thanksgiving break. And I don't know if you remember this, but at the time we were trying to use Skype, and that was what was available to us. And it managed to work okay, I think, and I don't even remember if anything ever came of that episode or if you just decided that that particular patch wasn't worth the time and effort. But definitely a fun time in our lives. It's fun to be back with you.

Yes. After 11 years in our podcasting hiatus, we were roommates in college, and we started this podcast about kind of our college life and what was going on on campus. And really the main listener I remember is somebody's mom used to email us and thank us. I don't remember whose mom it was. Yeah, I don't remember either. But that was some of the best feedback that we got. It's like, hey, my son never tells us anything that's going on. So I listen to you guys and we know what's happening. Yes. And it was short-lived, sadly. I was thinking about that today. What if we had continued that and then passed it on to other students and it still went on? It would have been a great legacy. I mean, life gets in the way. We were juniors at the time, I think, and you and your studies, you were super busy, and I was not as busy in my studies, although I should have been.

But, yeah, it was a great time, though, and I still remember it fondly. And I'm really excited to see you picking up the podcast thing again, this whole waiting tables thing. I've been a, I don't want to say a faithful listener, but I have listened to every episode, And I'm really enjoying what you're getting to do with this and hoping that the audience at large is finding it useful. Thank you. I am finding it useful. I've learned a lot from my guests and hope I will continue to and hope others do as well. Maybe I'll have to get some voice coaching from you at some point with your golden radio voice. Maybe. I don't know if I'm the perfect coach. I could probably use some coaching myself, but you're doing a great job, Tim, so keep up the good work. Thank you. Well, I wanted us to talk a little bit about audio equipment, kind of changing directions from the first few episodes of Waiting Tables and get into...

Something a little less meta like kind of communications at a high level and start to think about kind of the nitty gritty of audio equipment. Because this is a hard thing. I mean, almost every church today, at least in the United States and many churches around the world, deal with this challenge of amplification of audio. Yeah, it's definitely something that in our day and age, you know, I even think about something like Facebook. And I know we're not talking about communications. When Facebook first launched, it was kind of this, hey, go post something funny on other people's wall and keep track of people where they're at and their contact information. Nowadays, you use something like Facebook or Instagram, you have to have a picture and you have to have a certain PR refined message. In some ways, audio has become the same way. We've got lots of distribution platforms. We've got lots of opportunity to do in-home recording. Things have become more accessible and affordable, and certainly people want to use that as a venue, particularly for spreading, preaching, faithful gospel exposition.

And everyone wants to, in some ways, put their own stamp on not being selfish, I think, about religious things, but really trying to accomplish their mission of sharing the gospel with the world. And so audio does play an important part in that. Yeah. So there are, I guess, kind of two main reasons that you would use electronic audio equipment. One is amplification within your own church building, and then the other is either some kind of broadcasting or recording for after the fact, right?

I guess really, I mean, I don't know what the numbers are, but it seems like almost every church tries to record their sermons these days. Even if you were in a tiny church where you didn't need a microphone necessarily for amplification, if you want to record, you're going to need at least some sort of microphone and recording device. Right. Yep. And that goes back to the whole, you know, it starts with a philosophical question. What are your goals when you're looking at your audio setup? And certainly amplification and then post-production and later broadcast, those are different goals. And because of that, you do approach your entire audio chain, if you will, your audio setup in different fashions. But they each have their own purpose. And so I look forward to talking with you about that today, I guess. I was just reading Thomas Kidd's biography of Benjamin Franklin, who was a good friend of the famous evangelist George Whitefield. And Whitefield traveled all over the United States preaching.

And Franklin heard these claims that Whitefield could preach to as many as like 80,000 people or something. And he was kind of skeptical of that because obviously this is long before amplification, electronic amplification. And so Franklin kind of did his own experiment. And his decision was that Whitfield could preach to maybe as many as 20 or 30,000 people. And I was just saying there was a study a few years ago where someone did computer simulations and said, yeah, that was probably likely 20 or 30,000 people. But can you imagine the... Power of a voice. How much energy that would have taken to preach regularly to 30,000 people in one area? Sure. I mean, the dynamics of that, it really is immense. And, you know, you're talking about the nice research project there. In one of my functions at Trinity Christian School, I teach church history. And during that course, I actually use, there's about a 14-minute a mini-documentary that Martin Lloyd-Jones does.

The great doctor goes and kind of traces Whitfield's life, and he goes to certain places where Whitfield lived and where Whitfield preached. And you can find it, I think, the way I found it was through the Gospel Coalition's blog, actually. I think Justin Taylor blogged about it a few years ago. But you just watch this. It's on YouTube. And it's amazing, some of the places where Lloyd-Jones takes you, You know, there's standing on top of kind of a tombstone in a church courtyard or standing on a cliff overlooking a coal mining town. And you look at the setup and you have to say, God had to have blessed this man with a certain kind of voice to be able to project in some of these things. Now, certainly he used the benefit of some acoustical setups, certainly being on a hillside. And we can look to the Bible to that. You know, a lot of people talking about Jesus preaching the Sermon on the Mount, literally that he was probably up on some type of elevation and speaking down to the people. And certainly, even I think Ezra in reading the law back in, I think it's Nehemiah 8, where he's in some sense elevated and preaching down to the people. And that has, you know, even contemporary applications. Even if you don't have a pastor who can project like a Whitfield, you know, there are ways that you can enhance that and make that real and relevant in your situation. But that said, we do have the...

I'd say often blessing of electronic amplification these days. And, um, I read or heard something else recently that I hadn't really thought of, which is in the past, um, as a minister got older, he would have had to retire if he couldn't project well enough anymore.

And, um, these days, I mean, with the, with the microphone, if you, if you can make anything coherent come out of your mouth, you can amplify it. That's, that's very true. Very true. And, you know, that's one of the beauties of electronic amplification, that even the weaker in voice can be given an expanded voice, if you will. And so that is a wonderful privilege to know that someone who's called to ministry can continue to preach faithfully and fulfill that calling using some of the tools that God has put upon people's hearts in time past to make available to in this day and age. Yeah. And so you and I are both in churches that don't have very elaborate kind of musical setups with a lot of instruments that are electronic instruments or amplified instruments and various things. And I think one of the disadvantages there is a lot of times, it seems in my experience, if you have a church that has a bigger band or that kind of thing, you have some sound nerds who know a lot about the equipment. And are interested in getting it all set up right and everything.

And in our churches that have fairly simple music, we use a piano, which we do actually have miked for various reasons, but we don't really have anybody in our church, at least that I know of, who really just kind of nerds out on audio equipment and has stepped up to kind of help us set those things up. So I sort of fell into learning a lot about that. I don't know, five or six years ago, as the setup we had at one point was really failing.

So I was thinking we could kind of talk through just what are the basics of an audio setup if you're in a church that, starting off, if you just want to amplify a voice, like the voice of your preaching, what do you need for that? Sure. Well, I mean, sound projection is, it's like lots of things with communication, it boils down to two basics. You need an in and you need an out. I mean, that applies to so many things, whether computer programming or just day-to-day communication with friends and family. You need an input and you need an output. And so, the first thing that you would maybe want to consider is, depending on your application too, I guess, if you're looking for sound amplification, you kind of need to get a feel for your room. And this is something where you mentioned we're in smaller churches. My church, we run 29 members, but we'll run maybe 50, 55 people on a Sunday morning. And we have a modestly sized sanctuary. But one of the things about that sanctuary is that it has vaulted ceilings. And so in the long running span of the room, rectangular shaped, when you have a vaulted ceiling, some of that provides natural amplification based on how your stage is set up. And so interestingly enough, in our sound setup, we use very little, if any, amplification in terms of projecting by the speakers.

And you kind of have to feel that out because that will determine, for example, how large of a speaker you may need to fill the room.

And you always want to make sure that you have headroom, as it were, in the sense that you want to be able to get equipment that can project more than you need to use on a day-to-day basis. Rather than trying to push something that's too small to the max. So our church started in a gymnasium and where sound really just died when it either from the singing or the preaching in the room. It just died. There was no kind of amplification from the structure of the room. So we had early on, we were renting space in a public school from the county, and they allowed us to rent a portable PA system, which in hindsight we wasted a lot of money on because we paid like $50 a week or something to rent this thing that was like a $300 system. Oh, yeah. Ooh, yeah. And that's one of those things too. We talk about smaller churches. If you're not in a permanent space, that definitely changes the game. You're not necessarily looking at the bigger equipment that you might permanently install into a sound booth and mounting speakers in certain places on the wall or hanging it from the ceiling. You have to consider that portability aspect. And, you know, nowadays there are a number of portable PA systems. You'll see them used a lot at things like conferences.

You know, I went to a teacher's conference in Pittsburgh back in June. You know, and you have those individual classrooms where your seminar, you know, you have your large group seminars, but then you also have your breakout session. And each session has, you know, one little microphone and a nice little, you know, 50-watt speaker or something like that. It's really nice and portable, but it fills the room adequately. So certainly based on that situation, needing to have portability is also an important factor in some context. Yeah, and I have a recommendation on that we can talk about in a minute. But before we get there, let's just kind of talk through what – you talked about inputs and outputs. And so an input for a system would be a microphone, obviously, and there are various kinds of microphones. But for now, we can just say microphone. I think at some point it's going to be worth doing an episode on microphones and the different types. And then the outputs are your speakers. Mm-hmm.

Obviously, there has to be more in between there because, among other reasons, a microphone connected to a speaker doesn't amplify at all, right? So we need some sort of electronic device that's going to amplify. So after the sound goes into the microphone, where does it go from there? Yeah, well, it's interesting you mention that, Tim, because it seems to me, at least, over the last few years, we're starting to see, and I think it's in part because of maybe a change in consumer demand. You talk about the fact, where's the resident audio nerd in your congregation? Well, I think sound companies are starting to realize this, and so they are developing a number of different platforms and ways to try and simplify that process. Now, in the old days, you're right, you would need a microphone, and then it would need to be fed into some type of mixer or amplifier, and you'd have to make sure that you got the right voltage settings applied, and make sure that you weren't excessively gaining here. Maybe you'd run it through some equalization, maybe you'd have things like noise limiters and gates to kind of clean up your sound. And certainly if you're going for a very polished professional sound, all of those things are still important.

But nowadays, they do make a number of speakers that you'll find, for example, will have built-in amplifiers into them. And in the most basic setup, that does provide some measure of simplicity and control that can be very beneficial for a small congregation. I think our current sound setup has, we have a pair of, I think they're called Mackie Thumps, 12Hs or 12-inch Mackie speakers, but they have built-in amplifiers. And so you can take an unamplified microphone, a simple dynamic, something like a Shure SM58, which is kind of the standard vocal artist microphone that you see on stages all across the country. You can take that with an XLR cable and just plug it right into the back of the speaker, and you have an individual volume control that does a halfway decent job. So we're still amplifying, right? So it's one piece of hardware, but we're still talking about an amplifier. So typically, between your microphone and your speaker... You're going to have an amplifier, which is something that is taking power in and is boosting the sound. And sometimes you might have several in a more complex system. You might actually have several levels of amplification, like a microphone might go into something called a preamp, which just starts to boost it before it goes through the rest of the system.

And then the other thing that you almost always are going to need to have is a mixer of some sort, right? So that's allowing you to adjust the levels of the system up and down. Sure. And, you know, part of that too, for example, you talk about maybe wanting to mic the piano. Well, you know, in the flow of a worship service, you're not going to want to take the time to take one microphone and run it, you know, out of the interior of the piano and then run it up onto the stage so that your pastor can speak into it. You want to be able to have multiple inputs and multiple places where you would take signal in. And that's where a mixer comes into handy. Now, we mentioned at the beginning of the podcast, we're not in churches that use lots of bands. But certainly, if you have a guitar and need an acoustic guitar input, that's something to consider. And that helps determine, for example, what kind of size of mixer you need. I think we have a 12-channel mixer, which allows us to—it's a little more than we need, but we have an input from a main pulpit mic. We have a wireless mic that we can keep plugged in, and we use in the context of Sunday schools or maybe an occasional congregational meeting where the pastor or the leader is not up on the stage, on the platform, where the pulpit mic is. We also have inputs that allow audio to come in from, say, a DVD player.

Something of that nature. If you need to do accompaniment music input, maybe your church doesn't have a piano player, and you want to use the nice piano recordings that are available, for example, on opc.org on the Trinity Hymnal page. You want to be able to pipe that music in so that people can hear it. And so you're right, the mixer is important.

Input and output side as well. If you want to route audio, for example, to a nursery, or you want to control maybe putting some sound out into your lobby so that guests know when and when they can or can't maybe enter the sanctuary to maintain the sound. The, I don't know, what do you call it? Not the aura, but maintain peace and decorum in the sanctuary. So mixers are definitely important when it comes to that. And then there's the whole discussion about analog versus digital too, which is starting to get out of my league.

So I just will talk about what we had landed on after this kind of terrible rental situation in the gym. So we were in a situation where we had to set up and tear down each week. At that point in our church, we only needed a single microphone on our pulpit. And we had been renting this system that had a wireless mic and the mic had a short in it. So it like cut in and out. It was really terrible. And so maybe five years ago, we bought a system called the Fender Passport 300. So Fender, like Fender guitars. And this is an all-in-one speaker mixer amp system. So everything but the microphones, all built into one device. That it's two speakers that like kind of clamshell close up around the mixer amplifier. And it has been a really fantastic system. And now we're actually in a permanent facility and we still use it sort of in separate ways. So this is for a church of 100 to 200 people. I'm trying to remember how powerful. I think it's 300 watts. So they don't actually make that particular device anymore, but it looks like their newer system is the Fender Audio Passport Event.

They've changed it from the numbers to these different names like Event. And it's a 350-watt system. But it's seven input channels. It has basic mixer controls on it. And you can do like a tape in or a line in if you want. And there's a line out for recording and then outputs into the speakers. And for, I think, the event system is $700. So that's without a microphone and also without the speaker stands. We also bought speaker stands for ours. But that is a really nice setup. If you have a simple... You know, relatively small situation for a church, that is plenty powerful and something I would highly recommend. I actually ran across, I don't think it was the 300. I think it might have been even the 50. They have a smaller version that they used to sell. But actually, one of my friends, one of my best friends from high school, when he got married, he used a system. He used the Fender Passport system, the fellowship hall where they had their reception. And like you said, if you're one of those people who you just say, this sound stuff, it's scary, it's creepy, I don't want to mess with a whole bunch of stuff.

A system like the Passport system is a great place to start because a lot of those strange connections and trying to control levels, it's all fairly integrated. And it's a pretty simple user interface. And like you said, with the 300 and you get up to 300 watts, that's really going to cover a lot of ground. Not in your really big sanctuaries, but in smaller mid-sized sanctuaries, you're going to get plenty of oomph to cover the room. And so we also bought, to go with that, a Shure gooseneck microphone. So this is the Shure MX-412 and the MX-418. The 12 and 18 is the number of inches long it is. And so we have that mounted to our pulpit. And this is a microphone that's used. Like if you see on the news, like on the United Nations, and they're talking into a microphone mounted to the desk, it's probably one of these Shure microphones. They're a couple hundred dollars, and it is a fantastic microphone. If you have someone who's speaking from a pulpit where they're not moving around a lot and you have a way to mount one of these microphones to it, I could not recommend it more highly. The sound out of it is so good. Yeah, well, and that goes back, you know, that goes back into the design question, you know, what are you trying to accomplish?

And those kinds of microphones, they're great for pulpits because they have what's, you know, typically they have what's called a hypercardioid pickup pattern. And that's something that when you're shopping for microphones, and again, there are other experts out there that can do a far better job of getting into all the nitty gritty. But when you're looking for microphones, you want to look for certain types of aspects like that. Does it have a certain pickup pattern? When you talk about hypercardioid, you think about a shape like a heart, and then you kind of broaden it out. And that works well for pulpit mics, because a pastor who's somewhat animated maybe moves a little bit what we call off-axis. In other words, they're not right on top of the microphone. Microphones that are styled like that give you the ability to still pick up adequate signal, and you don't get these sharp drop-offs where all of a sudden something's really loud, and then something's really soft. Which can be very frustrating as a listener. Certainly, when you're looking for those kinds of things, you want to be a little informed about what kind of microphone you can use.

Our pulpit mic is from Audio-Technica, I believe. I can't remember the model number exactly, but Audio-Technica tends to run maybe slightly cheaper than Shure. And, of course, the rule is still generally there. You kind of get what you pay for. So you do have to be careful about trying to find some of those budget cut rate things. And there are all sorts of places. Amazon's a great example. You can find all sorts of microphone options there. But some of these names, and you say, wow, that's a really great sticker price. I can afford that. That's really cheap. You just have to be a little careful because the construction may not be good. You talked a little bit earlier about the wireless mic that shorted out. Those kinds of things pop up in cheaper models. And so you have to be careful when you're trying to pick that kind of stuff out. Yeah, we bought a cheap wireless mic at one point. I mean, talking like a $30 setup or something, and it was unusably bad.

And so we also, in terms of wireless mics, the really expensive thing is not the microphone unit itself, but the transmitter unit. And we use a Shure transmitter unit as well. And those are pricey. I mean, they're $400 or $500 or something just for a single microphone, the transmitter receiver. But they work really well and you really do get what you pay for with that yeah sure has a great reputation and they and they've got a lot of experience in the field and so generally when you're looking in the microphone front shores is is definitely toward the top of the list in terms of general affordability slightly high end maybe on the cost and in some things but but you're going to get a very good product whatever line you get, I can't remember off the top of my head, but so we now have a lapel mic that can clip on. It's like a suit jacket or a shirt. I think it's a Shure mic that works well. And then we also recently got like a head-worn microphone. So this is one where it clips onto your ear and then comes down over your face. It's actually a dual ear unit, not a single ear unit, which if you have a speaker who's moving around, it's nice to have one that's stable and they don't have to keep reaching up and adjusting it. And I'll put that in the show notes, which are at waiting-tables.com if someone would like to look at those particular microphones. We've been really happy with those.

After we did that, we moved into our building. We needed a slightly more complex audio setup.

And I did some research into mixers, and we needed a mixer that had more channels because that Fender one I talked about is only seven channels, has just four microphone inputs, and our system's gotten more complex.

And so I went with this Mackie FX-16 V2 16-channel mixer, which is a long name, but it's a really nice mixer for not very much money. I mean, they're $200, $300 maybe. Yeah.

And we've been really happy with that. So actually, unlike the Fender, that's just a mixer, so it doesn't have an amplifier. You can't just plug it straight into a speaker. It needs something to amplify the sound. So the microphones come into it. Well, I was going to say, when you look at mixers, there are some offerings that are amplified mixers that are built into one unit. I still remember from my days in youth group, I remember it was a Mackie unit, but it had the amplifier built into the back of it. And they're going to run a little bit more expensive.

But as we said earlier, you just need to make sure you have the amplification in one stage or another. If you're going to have amplified speakers, you can use the unamplified mixer. Or if you're going to use an amplified mixer, then you can go with what we call passive or unamplified speaker, just as long as that's in there somewhere. But you're right, the Mackie FX line is, again, Mackie's another name that's been around for some time. In some ways, they actually developed, really, the whole idea of the amplified speaker. The SRM450 was the standard even 15, 20 years ago where they started having built-in amplifiers and still to this day are desired by musicians all around the place. We actually happened to get a pair donated to us at my school, and we use them in our new gymnasium building as PA Pridgen. But Mackey's another great name to keep on your list when you're looking for equipment. And I need to correct what I said. That mixer is actually about $500.

They get cheaper if you have less inputs into it. And one way usually you can know if a mixer is an amplified mixer or not is the amplified ones are way bigger, right? So if you have something that's like a big, thick thing, yeah, because it's actually amplifying the audio electronically inside. Whereas a mixer that doesn't have an amplifier is what you you might think of in being like a sound booth or something just this flat thing that sits on a table right absolutely and the way we actually ended up using the mackie is our microphones all go into that and then we we mix it all down to a single output and then it runs right back into the original fender, mixer amplifier which that provides amplification and that goes into our speakers yeah um excellent yeah it's kind of a hacky thing to do but it's worked out nicely for us yeah i've.

I've not really gotten to looking into other amplification options because that's worked well for us. Are there any standard kind of go-to amplifiers that you know of, like a 300-400 watt amplifier? Sure. So if you're looking in terms of amplifiers, I think probably the industry leading name is you're going to look toward Crown, C-R-O-W-N. They're pretty well known for having dedicated amplifiers. I think QSC is another more top-line version as well that puts out faithful amplification. You know, when it comes to me, I get a little concerned when it comes to amplifiers, in the sense that when you work with separate amplifiers and you work with thinking about running from the amplifier to the speaker, sometimes you have to be careful about the different wattage settings. So, you know, if your amplifier can drive, say, 500 watts, you want to make sure that the speakers that you put on the other end have a certain what they call load matching. And you don't want to mess with the circuitry. Sometimes speakers generally have what we call 8-ohm impedance.

Which is kind of that internal resistivity that allows kind of converging that electrical signal into moving the cone and such. But, you know, sometimes... You can literally destroy a speaker. Oh, absolutely. Or set an amplifier on fire. I mean, yeah, it's... It's very tricky and potentially dangerous. Now, obviously, the lower the wattage you go, the less risk you run. And you always want to make sure that you keep your amplifier output below what your speakers can maximally handle. You want the speaker number to be bigger, generally, than the amp number. But, you know, I find that, I still, even to this day, find that a little tricky. And, of course, you'll have the opportunity maybe to find an audio expert who can get into that nitty-gritty.

You mentioned your setup. At our church, we recently, so, well, to give you some history, when I first joined the church seven years ago, the church had a simple Bogan amplifier that had... Two quarter-inch inputs for microphones and some line-in input. And they had some old wiring that was distributed to some ceiling speakers and so on and forth, distributed throughout the building. And we were getting lots of issues with grounding buzz. We were getting issues with proper amplification and signal. And so the church decided, hey, let's try out and go get something maybe a little more up-to-date that's a little more intuitive and easy to use. And we actually brought in some guy that we weren't terribly happy with the way he installed everything but we ended up with a Yamaha CX-124 mixer it's a 12 channel input and it gives main outputs monitor outputs you also have two auxiliary channels that are built into that mixer which you can use as separate outputs as well and that's unamplified and then we send our main outputs from the mixer to amplify the Mackie Thump 12s that I mentioned earlier. We send that there and amplify the signal there.

And then we send our auxiliary feeds to some bookshelf speakers from M-Audio, I believe. And they're just 30-watt bookshelf speakers, call them reference monitors sometimes, that have good, even responses throughout the frequency ranges. And then they have individual volume controls so that the person in the nursery can turn down their audio level and let the baby sleep, for example.

Whereas you may want to run hotter levels in a sanctuary so that you can project everybody there. So that's another approach that you can go to, and that too avoids that kind of amplifier speaker mismatching thing that could get you into trouble.

Yeah, so you can have your mixer and then your amplifier and then your speaker, or you can have a mixer amplifier, or you can have a combined and then those go into the speaker. Or you can have the amplifier and speaker combined, which is a powered speaker, and that comes out of the mixer. Or sometimes you can have something that's really all three all in one. Yeah, that's the thing. There's lots of options out there. And I think that's why people get intimidated and scared when it comes to doing audio, because there are so many options. And, you know, just with a little bit of, you know, simple reading and some practical guidance, you know, it can become a simplified process. It just it boils down to what you're trying to accomplish and, you know, and trying to keep things simple, you know, as much as you can. Are there any resources or web pages, any kind of go to's where you've learned about these things that are useful? Well, that's an interesting question, Tim. You know, I think you and I, before we, you know, in talking about how we wanted to do this podcast, you know, one of the things that you and I both recognize is that. There are a number of excellent sound equipment distributors out there, companies like Crutchfield, companies like Sweetwater.

Even ones that maybe don't have quite as high regard like Musician's Friend and places like that. So these are stores that sell equipment. Right, stores that sell equipment. But a lot of these places, they'll have very informed, what you might call tech support people that you can speak to. You can say, hey, I spoke with someone from B&H, which is a New York City outfit.

And I was asking them actually about a video camera saying, hey, we want to maybe do live streaming but also send things out to a monitor. And you kind of give them a map of what you're trying to accomplish. And these guys, they know their catalog inside and out, and they'll be able to hook up equipment for you. But these guys also will write blogs and articles that kind of give you some basic foundational information to help. So I found some help through there. But honestly, a lot of my education just came from personal experience, getting to work certain opportunities. As you mentioned at the beginning of the show, I got to work at the radio station at the college, WSAJ, and my advisor there, Mr. Darren Morton, who still works there today, he was a gearhead. He knew his stuff, things about processing and audio delivery, and did a lot of the AV stuff at school, and I just kind of shadowed him in my current school setting. I worked with a guy who used to do audio for our school fundraising banquets, and you just learn tips and tricks just shadowing and following along.

Maybe that's not the easiest thing for people to do. But if there are volunteer opportunities, and maybe it's not necessarily at a radio station, because there aren't radio stations everywhere, but think about maybe Christian schools in your area that may have someone who's tech savvy. And you can just kind of go and be alongside the process and pick up tips and tricks along the way. And that really does fill out your education to kind of get a decent grasp on it. and give you some confidence to go out and do things in your own. I've gotten good help from, I think, Sweetwater, one of the online distributors from their customer support. Sometimes it worries me, though, that buying relatively limited amounts of equipment and not necessarily super high-end equipment, that I'm just not a big enough fish that someone's going to spend a lot of time with me. Um and there are a number of resources online websites uh about church audio but a lot of them um it seems to me kind of jump towards these much more complex and robust systems right which is is fine if that's all you need but i would really love one day maybe put together a handbook or something kind of church audio for small churches something like yeah you and i you and i can start working on that at some point when in our copious when we have yeah free time yeah.

I want to talk briefly before we go. We're getting a little long on time here, but I want to talk about the other side of audio, which is recording. And obviously there can also be live streaming, which I'll probably have an episode about somewhere down the road. But recording is taking your audio and saving it usually now to a digital file and then distributing it elsewhere. But so recording obviously requires a microphone, right? You need some way to pick up the audio. Absolutely. And there are a couple of ways you can do that. The simplest is to use a electronic digital recorder, right? So this is a system that can be completely independent of the rest of your audio setup. That's right, yeah, and I think I still remember, I think, a few years ago when you were kind of looking for what's that recorder. At our church, we have what's called an Olympus LS10. It's about a $100 unit, and it has a built-in microphone, so it goes right there straight to your recording device. It has options to plug in for an external mic, just a nice little eighth-inch socket.

It's got built-in things like automatic gain control, which helps with some of the volume levels. It's got different encoding formats, so you can choose what kind of digital file you want. There's an opportunity to expand with memory cards and things of that nature. And you can run it by battery, or you can run it from AC out of the wall. And something like that, you're right, it keeps the process very simple. And generally speaking, especially for vocal applications, you're going to get a decent recording to maybe even a good recording, almost every single time with minimal tech intelligence needed. So these devices basically have a microphone that pick up the audio, and then they record to an SD card is the typical thing. Sometimes they'll be internal, and then you plug it into a computer, or you just pop out the SD card, and you can record usually in a WAV file or an MP3 file. And then you take that on the computer and you maybe edit it down and then upload it to some kind of service to share that. And we'll get into that in a future episode of Waiting Tables. But a really common unit or a well-known brand is the Zoom Recorders.

We currently have actually two units called Zoom H2Ns, which are not their least expensive model, but one of the lower end models. So we actually record our sermons twice through two separate units because we like to not lose our recordings. Yeah, redundancy. That's important. Redundancy is super important. I can't tell you how many times actually in my past year how, you know, we have something go wrong with our recorder and all of a sudden that file's gone and say, oh, sorry, pastor, can you record this later in your study off your notes? There's some recordings of uh derek thomas who's a pastor in south carolina who taught a sunday school class on um pilgrim's progress and um they lost the recording on the first several episodes and he so he's like redoing the class in his office and you can hear in his voice how thrilled he is to yeah yeah we try to avoid that situation have you used a zoom recorder ever that they have.

I have not personally used one. I did speak, actually, there is a podcast that's tied in with the Association of Classical Christian Schools, was the teacher's conference I went to in Pittsburgh, and they were using, I think they had the H4 Zoom model, but... Rave reviews. Every time I've heard that. Sermon Audio, which is a publishing service for sermons, I know that they use a Zoom handy recorder for some of their... They have this sermon audio, digital devotional things. They're videos, but in the video, you can see the Zoom recorder right on the table. They get rave reviews almost everywhere I've seen them used. Yeah. If you step up to the H4N, the number actually refers to the number of channels. So the H4N, you can plug in two microphones straight into the recorder if you want to record from a microphone. And then you can actually do multi-channel recording. So you have separate tracks for each channel, which in some situations is a really valuable thing. Super.

Yeah, the H1 is their least expensive is $110. The H4N is only $230. They're not very expensive. And you can even go up to the H6 or H5. It's a four-track recorder and H6, six-track recorder. So those are nice. And there's the Tascam is another brand that's pretty well known. And these are used in professional situations. They're very reputable devices. But in terms of thinking of recording a sermon, if you want to use one of these recorders and use its built-in microphone...

One of the things to think about is where you position that. So if you have a recorder and you're using a pulpit and you put the recorder right on the pulpit, you may hear every time the pastor or speaker bumps the pulpit or turns a page in the Bible. Yep. So you can pick up a lot of noise. Yeah. And that's the tricky thing, too. You talk about incidental bumps. You talk about rustling, background noise. Because some of the things, too, with the built-in microphones, they're not very selective in terms of their pickup pattern. So you'll get all sorts of noise if you try to use that internal mic. And if you're in a quiet environment, it's fine. But if you get a little bit of noise, you get a crying baby or maybe have a projector whirring in the background, sometimes that can be kind of annoying on the recorded file. And at the end of the day, you need to have something that's clean and clear and easy to understand, or else people are just simply not going to listen. Your recorder is a pretty small one. Does it have a tripod mount on the back? We have, yes, it has a tripod mount, and we definitely have a tripod, you know, to set it up in various scenarios. A lot of these have a little hole in the back where you can screw in a tripod. So the hole is the standard, like, is on the bottom of a camera. And so you can go buy a cheap tripod or...

Even a microphone stand, if you put the right head on it or something. And so you can set this thing on a stand and then put that next to your pulpit or your lectern. And that way you're not picking up every bump of the pulpit also on the recording device. And then you can just take it and take the microphones on it and point them straight at your speaker, the person speaking, right? Not the electronic speaker. Right. And again, with these recording devices too, if you don't want to use the internal mic and you have an external mic option, that's how we end up using our recorder. If you're going to go with the mixer and the amplification anyway already, if your mixer has what we call a line-out signal, it's usually something like that red-white RCA jack pair, that you can feed out and send it into a microphone eighth-inch port, that's what we do is we feed our mixer audio in, and that way you're getting all your multiple inputs if you need them, or, you know, it just, it allows the better microphone to do the heavy lifting for you and allow the recorder to focus on capturing the audio. Yeah. So we do that exact same thing. And if you're using a really high quality microphone on your pulpit or something like one of these Shure microphones, something really nice, use the best quality audio that you can to go into your recording. So you can, we take the sound right out of our mixer and then that goes into the recorder through the eighth inch jack. And that.

You and I have talked about recording a lot over the last few years as I've worked on that in our own church and you have in yours and you really are able to make improvements. Like these things can be noticeably better and it's just a better experience for everyone listening to it. Absolutely. We have the mixer that I mentioned, this Mackie mixer. And so there's a recording coming out of that. And so we record that and we record it into a WAV file into our handy mixer. So it's a really high quality recording. And then we use this old Fender system as the amplifier and it also has a line out. And so our second recorder goes into that and they're in different places in our church. And so we try to start both recorders. um and the the um the backup one is a relatively low quality mp3 which would be fine to listen to but it's a small file size and it's on like a 64 gigabyte sd card so the the handy recorder will only show that it has up to a thousand or 999 hours of recording space and so i don't actually know how much we'll record on it but yeah we just keep recording and so then if we are like oh we lost something from a few weeks ago we can go back and get that and that's worked out really nicely for us yeah yeah there's there's all sorts of good stuff when it comes to to storage and.

Like I said, we're running out of time, so we don't have time to talk about even post-production. But if you don't want to get a recorder, for example, though, we should mention too, nowadays you can pretty much straight record into even a laptop or something, even your cell phone nowadays, and still get a decent recording. So if you can't find it in your budget to get one of these handheld recorders, maybe that's an option for you too. I think the neat thing these days in terms of budgets is some of the systems we've talked about that we've used in my own church, you go buy one of these Fender passport systems. It gives you a pretty simple speaker mixer amp setup. You go buy, you know, maybe splurge on a mic and then you go buy a handy recorder that's $150 and you have to buy some cables and stuff. But for under $1,500, you have a basic setup where you can both amplify sound in a, you know, a gymnasium or a small auditorium, and you're also recording sound in really high quality. Obviously, it's money, but it's cheaper than ever before, I think. Sure. And yeah, you can pick your places where you want to save money a little bit, but you can still get even decent sound out of things under a thousand bucks even. And maybe you say, hey, let's save the amplification for later and let's focus on recording or vice versa.

The beautiful thing about the ongoing development, in the audio world is that competition increases, quality increases, and the costs go down. It's just basic economics. So it's a good time to be learning this stuff, and it's becoming more and more accessible, even for the smallest of children. I will try to link to all the different devices and stores and resources that we've mentioned here at waiting-tables.com. And my plan is I've not yet enabled comments, but with a little bit of fear and trepidation, I'm going to enable comments on waiting-tables.com. And I would love to hear how other people have thought through these things and solved some of these problems. One thing that's clear here is there are countless different ways that you can deal with these things. And I would love to hear how other people have thought about it. And I'd love to hear ideas as to what directions we should take this in the future with conversations and things that people would like to learn. And maybe even people that I could interview about these topics. Todd, I really appreciate you coming on. This has been really helpful. And I hope others will find it helpful as well. Hey, it was a pleasure, Tim. Thanks so much for having me. And keep up the good work with this. We're excited to see where this will go.
