---
title: "Graphic Design with Matt Heerema"
date: 2017-07-13
tags:
    - Waiting Tables
    - Podcast
description: "I talk with Matt Heerema of Mere Agency ways in which churches can improve their graphic design."
---

*Waiting Tables Episode 4 with Matt Heerema*

{{< audio src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/waitingtables-media.com/audio/graphic-design-with-matt-heerema.mp3" >}}

Matt Heermea is a Pastor of [Stonebrook Church](http://stonebrook.org/) in Ames, Iowa and owner, director and Web Strategist at [Mere Agency](https://mereagency.com/ "Mere Agency - Effective, easy-to-use, Web sites"). Prior to this, Matt was Principal Designer at AOL, working on such sites as [Engadget.com](https://www.engadget.com/), and later as the Sr. Web Manager for [DesiringGod.org](http://www.desiringgod.org/ "Desiring God").

Matt recently wrote an article called [Three Tips to Instantly Improve Your Church's Graphic Design](http://mattheerema.com/web-tech-design/2017/06/three-tips-to-instantly-improve-your-churchs-graphic-design/). I speak with Matt about that article.

Here were some of my takeaways:

* The reason we get cheesy, bad design is that people are given the tools [e.g. computers] without the principles of design.
* Even if you don't have formal training, if we do design mindfully, we can dramatically improve it.
* Thinking about our graphic design and our communication is a way to show we care about our ministry.

Go [read the post](http://mattheerema.com/web-tech-design/2017/06/three-tips-to-instantly-improve-your-churchs-graphic-design/) and listen to my interview with Matt!

### Links

- [Three Tips to Instantly Improve Your Church's Graphic Design](http://mattheerema.com/web-tech-design/2017/06/three-tips-to-instantly-improve-your-churchs-graphic-design/)
- [Unsplash](http://unsplash.com) - Website dedicated to sharing copyright-free photography under the Unsplash license.
- [Lightstock](https://www.lightstock.com/) - Christ-Centered, Royalty-Free Christian stock photos, vectors and footage starting as low as $5.
- [Font Squirrel](https://www.fontsquirrel.com/) - Free fonts.
- [Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/) - Free fonts.
- [Fiverr](https://www.fiverr.com/) - Freelance Services Marketplace for The Lean Entrepreneur
- [Upwork](https://www.upwork.com/) - Hire Freelancers & Get Freelance Jobs Online
- [MattHeerema.com](http://mattheerema.com/) - Web, Tech, Productivity, Theology
- [MereChurch](https://merechurch.com/) - Simple, powerful church websites
- [Mere Agency](https://mereagency.com/) - Effective, easy-to-use, websites

## Transcript



The Waiting Tables Podcast. I am here with a special guest, Matt Harama, who is the owner and web strategist at Meter Agency, and he is also a bivocational pastor at Stonebrook Church in Iowa. Welcome, Matt. Thanks, Tim. Thanks for having me. I don't know many people who are both a web strategist and a pastor, so maybe you can tell us a little bit about yourself and what you do and maybe even how you've gotten to where you are. Sure thing. So actually, I know a lot of people now that are a web developer designer of some streak and pastor. And maybe that's just the realm I run in or something like that. I run into a lot of guys like me. But how I got here is an interesting story, too, I think, anyway. So I like to bore people with it at parties. But I went to college, actually, for computer engineering. I thought I was going to be a software engineer and got started with all kinds of computer geeky sort of things and programming. And a couple of things happened all at once at the beginning of my sophomore year in college. And one of them was I was converted.

And the other was I felt a call to ministry or I felt a call to something. And that's a whole nother story. I interpreted it as a call to ministry. And really, really what it was just, I think, part of the overall conversion process and lighting up a passion for holiness and ministry and the word and evangelism and things like that, that I thought, well, the only people I know that do this sort of thing right now are pastors and missionaries. So that must be what I'm supposed to be. So I led a very sort of confused life for a long time, kind of was kind of handed this career as a web developer, web strategist over time, all through college, even out, got just some amazing opportunities that I couldn't deny. And the opportunity for ministry as a profession was sort of always elusive to me. So I lived with this sort of, well, I'm doing this ministry thing in the meantime until I get an opportunity to do the thing I'm supposed to be doing, which is full-time ministry. And that kind of led to the bivocational thing where I'm at now.

So there's a long story there, but that's kind of how I got here. Um, but, uh, I've, I've worked for Iowa State University, which is where I went to college is where I got my start. Um.

Uh learned i got paid to learn to make websites which was pretty cool paid to learn design and sort of things like that and then uh out of that um got picked up by aol um in 2006 where um my my little team was a startup that was bought in um i was hired by a startup that was bought by aol to run their whole blog universe okay so if you remember in 2006 which is a long time ago now There was this website called engadget.com. It was the technology blog on the internet. So I was in charge of design and development for engadget.com and 40 other similar network sites. Okay. So that's kind of where I got my real start. And that led to contacts and conversations with Desiring God Ministries. So I was the senior web manager for Desiring God website for three years. And then I started the agency a little over five years ago now. Okay. Yeah. Short road in here. Yeah. Desiring God is known for putting a lot of resources into their website and thinking through that. It's one I've admired over the years, probably admired your work at times. At times, probably. I was more of a steward of the good, the groundbreaking stuff was done by the guy before me, and I was a steward of his stuff mostly, but so I can't take too much credit and can brag about it at the same time.

And we'll probably come back to this a little bit at the end, but can you tell us about Mir Agency and what you do and what the company does? So MIR is a full service end-to-end web strategy design development and hosting maintenance kind of webmaster services. And we run all over different industries and things like that. But our real wheelhouse and our passion is to help the church use the web to impact the world with the gospel. That's our purpose statement. That's what we do. So almost all of our clients are church and ministry. Right now by design really and, At first, it was sort of accidental. That was just who our network was. And it just kind of turned out that we do better work when we're working in that arena.

So I spend my days, you know, my nine to five is working with churches and ministries all over the world, really, and helping them to be effective in their use of the web for their ministry. Great. Yeah. So the reason I reach out to you and ask you to come on and talk with me is I had come across a blog post you just recently put up, which is three tips to instantly improve your church's graphic design. And after I'd looked at that, I realized that I'd interacted with you briefly at one point, asking some questions about the Mere Church web services, looking at my own church. And I hope at some point to have you or someone come back on, maybe to talk more specifically about websites and what Mere Church offers. Because that's certainly something, as you know well, churches struggle with. And a lot of people, you know, men, pastors end up in the ministry and say, oh, we need to have a website. How do I do that? Right. Oh, that. Yes. Yes.

But before that, the reason I really like this post is, one, it's very practical and has some good things. Great. But also, it helps point out something that I think people don't always think about, which is we're almost all doing graphic design. If we're printing anything, making a sign, putting up a website, even making just a little graphic to put on Facebook, people don't necessarily think about that as we're doing graphic design for our church or our ministry. But it is, right? Yeah, that's right. And, uh...

There's an opportunity then to say, do we want to do that well, or do we want to make it look as cheesy or as bad as possible, which seems to be some people's goal.

Right. And I don't think anybody actually consciously sets out to make a bad design, right? And they just don't think – mostly they don't think about the fact that that's what they're doing. Right. That I'm engaging in a craft, a discipline that has a set of principles, that has a psychology behind it, that has an emotional impact on people. All they're thinking is, we need a sign in our lobby or we need business cards. And so I'll just go in and put some information on a piece of paper because that's what's important. Um and and i think that part of the reason for that that unlike most other trades or disciplines or things like that out there the desktop computer ever since the early 80s has made it seem like this is something that anyone can just go do without having to think about it and um that that's a weird thing nobody thinks this way about um plumbing right yeah exactly or being or or your your house your wiring of your house nobody thinks like hey you know i'll just go i'll just go pull the wiring out of my wall and do it different or you know what i need a new light bulb over there so i'm just gonna go run some wire but there are very few people that think that way so um but but we have this kind of illusion that.

Of oh i can just i can just make something on the computer because the tools are all right there and it's that's not really an illusion i'm being a little hyperbolic with that but um that the reason we get what we what people perceive as cheesy bad unprofessional design is because you're you're you're given the tools but not the principles right and so anyway lots to be said there but Yeah. Well, I just think it's such a great point. And I think this point I've made several times in the brief life of this podcast is sometimes in certain churches or just philosophies of ministry, people are concerned with sounding too businessy and saying, oh, well, the church is not a business. Uh so we don't want to use business words like graphic design and that's fine and i'm very sympathetic to that actually and i don't want people to think of their church as a business but it's it's really just a word to describe what we're doing which is uh laying out uh something visually to present and communicate and and we can uh learn some principles and learn how to to do that well.

Also, it doesn't have to become a huge budget item for a small church that doesn't have the money for it. The point of your post is there are some things that you can do even as a non-professional and as a volunteer, even in a church. Right. There are a few things that if you just keep them in mind. My whole point of the post was, hey, even if you have no formal training, if you just do these things a little bit more mindfully, with just these three ideas, you're going to vastly improve what you're doing. And of course, this is not necessarily aimed at those with a graphic design degree or, I mean, a background or training or even latent skill.

But most of the work that's done out there, I think, could be improved with even these. And any of these are just, hey, I'm thinking of friends of mine that I know who are tasked with. You know, they're good-hearted volunteers. They're just giving time, hey, we need a flyer. Go make one. And a lot of times you get kind of the deer in the headlights look and then, okay, I can do this. But if you've got these three things in mind quick, then you can actually produce something that's fairly serviceable. Right. Well, that's great. Let's talk through this post. Sure. You have three headlines and then some kind of sub points. The three headlines are, one, keep it extremely simple. Two, keep it consistent. And three, keep an eye on the pros. So number one, keep it extremely simple. Can you flesh that out for us a little bit? Sure. And again, so this is like training wheel type principles. So with the extremely simple, the whole idea of less is more.

I once, so I'm also my bivocational ministry. I'm also a preacher. And somebody told me one time, if you don't know quite what you're going to say in a sermon, don't compound the problem by going long. Right. So, so keep it simple. And the basic idea here is that there is a craft to combining colors. There's a craft and an art and a science even to these things, combining colors, combining typefaces, and then, and then overall, even elements on a page, there's a, there's a whole discipline of grid theory. So my whole my whole goal with this one point is to try to eliminate a lot of those sorts of things like you don't need to worry about combining fonts if you're just only using one um what is part of the idea there you don't need to worry about color coordination if you're just only using one um and then even with the photography you're using i have some i have some ideas there with just choose something very simple very ethereal uh one of the major problems i see in design uh amateur design out there is that the photo is too complex or too literal to the idea.

So straightforward, utilitarian, abstract, these are all good things. And then I give some, of course, some tools and some sources for these things. Yeah. And I think those are actually worth mentioning it. And I will link to your post in the show notes for this, which will be at waiting-tables.com. But you mentioned some sources for... Stock photography, there are a zillion websites out there these days, but you mentioned Unsplash and Newstock is having some free resources. I'm not familiar with those. And then Lightstock, which is a paid source that's well known. And new stock and light stock specifically are aimed at ministry type context okay and unsplash is fairly generic and the unsplash has does have some collections um that are aimed at ministry as well but they both these all one of the things that are important here with stock photography as well and the reason i cite some sources here is that sometimes you just do a google search and you pull an image from that well you run into copyright issues and rights management issues and things like that. And these sources all are very clear about what you're allowed to do with the images and things. So there's also that actually respecting, honoring the law, honoring the ownership, the property rights and the intellectual property of the people that took the photos in the first place. That's part of integrity and ministry as well. Yeah, I completely agree. Churches should be setting an example there.

And so go look into those. And I mean, you can search stock photography and find just countless other pages. And some of them, you pay a monthly subscription or you might pay by the asset, but there's a lot of good stuff and it's easy to access in the internet age. So you say, go ahead. I was gonna say one other point on the keeping it simple. One overall thrust of the post is just urging even humility in the task itself.

Understanding that, you know what? But there is an art and a science and a psychology and a craft behind this.

And so when I start thinking thoughts like this needs to be more fun and festive, and I say this in the post, like I would just say, just pull the brakes on what you're doing. Think utilitarian. There's a craft to actually communicating the thing you're trying to communicate. And what I see happen almost always when somebody who doesn't have the skill set of graphic design tries to pull off something like a mood, like an attitude, they miss almost always. And you end up with something confusing or cheesy. or yeah so yeah and and in that context you suggest uh only use one font ever for everything right no really i mean it actually that's such a temptation i think you know particularly uh for a non-designer a choosing a font is uh or fonts is, an easy way to feel like you're doing something fancy, right? Because you just go through the menu and it's all changing and it looks neat. Right. And, and often when people are trying to be clever there, that's, uh, it just can look painful and, and people see that even, even if maybe you can't, uh, pin down wide as it just can look cheesy. And that is one point here that I, that I use even in my intro, a lot of these things, you know, I, I've got some reaction to this post.

What's the big deal? You know, who cares? I don't ever think about this sort of thing.

It doesn't ever bother me. And the reality is that design and aesthetics and things like that, which us Protestants, we tend to historically have just sort of denied in the church. And I think that at the Reformation, there was good reasons for like literally whitewashing all the aesthetics and all of that. There's a theological statement they were making when they were doing that. But, um, so all that said, there is, uh, you, you affect people at the subconscious level at the, at the, at the emotional level, and they're going to experience it as something like, I don't like that person or that organization. They're not going to experience it like, Oh, that's an ugly design. They're going to, they're going to think of it as that event sounds really dumb instead of that poster is disorganized. That's not how they're going to experience it. And that's how design affects people. And I, um, Or, you know, some people have a reaction to Apple products as if, wow, Apple is just amazing and cool and super slick. And that's the reaction I have, by the way. So Apple is created by geniuses. And so I want one. Some people have a similar reaction. It's all based on the same thing that Apple is very pretentious and for snobs.

They're all reacting to the same thing. It's just kind of their preconceptions they're bringing to the game, by the way, too. But what they're reacting to is the excellence and refined nature of the design of the thing. And then it's some cultural bias in their background that is going to affect their overall reaction. But they don't think something like, wow, they really make good use of negative space and their color balance is very subtle. And their forms and icon shapes are all designed according to the same consistent pattern. They don't think things like that. You don't understand the technique. You just react emotionally is how you react. And so that's part of this whole thing is I know you never think about it. You don't think you ever think about it. You don't actually process it consciously. You process it subconsciously and emotionally. And that's why this is important. So now I'm rambling. Yeah, that's great. I love it. So on the point of fonts, moving into point two, which is keep it consistent. Number one is find an excellent font from a professional source that isn't currently installed on your computer. Yes. Which probably a lot of people may not even know that that is a thing you can do.

You aren't limited to the fonts you have. Um, and there's some really neat sources out there too, that you mentioned our font squirrel, which I'm not familiar with, but then Google fonts is actually a Google resource that is free fonts. Uh, that's great. Free source of, of really well rendered fonts. And, um, for the most part, the default font set that comes pre-installed on your computer should never be used for anything except to display webpages. And even then we're starting to change that game too. But they're default for a reason. And again, it's going to come across. People aren't going to know why they're reacting to this thing as boring or commonplace or whatever. But the reason is because they've seen the font a billion times before. And so there's nothing new to react to. And it's just going to feel unfinished. And they're not sure why they're feeling like this thing is unfinished. Or they might not even react to it as unfinished. But they're going to react to the organization as either thoughtless or careless or just subpar.

So that's part of the reason. So you'll, if you, if you look through your, like, if you open up one of your apps that has a font dropdown and look at some of the fonts there and then start looking out in the world, you're going to see them everywhere. You know, copper plate is the most annoying thing to me. It's even more annoying, I think, than common comic sands. I think comic sands and papyrus are the, the, the whipping boys, the scapegoats of the font world. That's fine. But copper plate is the real problem. So copper plate and impact. Those are those are two common fonts that are used everywhere that shouldn't be you know but the whole point is um, And part of the deal with consistency is it's going to actually lend some cohesion to your overall organization.

All of your communication are going to feel similar, feel cohesive, which is going to, again, lend sort of the at the emotional level and subconscious level the reaction that these people know what they're doing and they're acting thoughtfully. They're acting consistently. And that makes me feel safe. That makes me feel comfortable because there is a plan and a structure behind this. So that's why I say, find one really good font and use it for everything. And that way, too, by the way, you take out the equation of having to search for fonts, which makes your design timeline go down. And you've got one. It's vetted. You don't have to think about it. You just use it. Yeah. And so you don't even mean just with everything, you don't even mean just a single thing you're designing, like within a single flyer, but even across- Every flyer you ever make. Publications. Yes. I completely agree. I think that's really good. And of course, I'm vastly oversimplifying. I get it. People want all the edge cases, you know, find email me or something. But, you know, this is if you're familiar with Dave Ramsey and his financial principles, for example, you know, never, ever, ever use credit card ever. Don't use it for anything. No. And then people call into his radio show all day. What about this exception? Or what about this exception? His answer is no, don't do it. No, don't do it. No, don't do it. Every time, even though.

Most people know that there could be a time and a place and a wise use of a credit card sometimes. But by and large, nine times out of 10, it's going to come back and bite you. And I'm feeling the same way. I'm being vastly overly simplistic by saying only one font for everything ever. But that's going to yield better results for almost everybody than trying to break that rule. So there you go. I would say another pragmatic benefit of that is if you have multiple people, like if you have multiple volunteers who are putting together publications or little things, it's a way to just say, okay, everyone's doing this in the same way. And it kind of reins people in a little bit. So you don't have the one Comic Sans aficionado who's always preparing Sunday school notes. The papyrus rogue. Yeah. Right.

Like that so well and and here's the thing most most organizations and again you know i i feel you about not not wanting to be all businessy about it or anything but most organizations that have thought this through have what's called a style guide that have our brand guidelines that have here's the fonts you're allowed to use on any publication so almost every organization worth its salt has done this at some point they've defined here's the logo and here's how to use it and here's how to not use it and here's the three fonts you're ever allowed to use and then even contexts in which font and uh in which to use each kind of font so right you know um that so one so one uh aspect of this point i'm making is you're basically select that one font use it for everything that's kind of a real simplistic way for an organization to have a starter sort of brand guidelines.

Yeah, that's a great idea. I really like that. Again, all these things are easier than ever with the internet. We're not passing around floppy disks with fonts on them. So you just might need to type up some instructions to share on how to install them. But it's usually pretty straightforward. You try to open a file and the computer asks you if you want to install it and it will just make it available. And then with that, you say this is in the same vein, which is make all of your web graphics look very similar. So, I mean, from your website to making things that you might be sharing on social media.

PowerPoint slides for sermons. If you use PowerPoint or something similar. Exactly right. And again, it's the same sort of idea with the brand guidelines. Usually a brand guide or style guide for an organization includes appropriate use of photography and it defines what kinds of photos to use and what kinds to avoid and things like that so my point here is just pick similar things so we're going to always use you know sort of blurry forest scenes or we can use mountainscapes or pictures of the ocean or something you know So pick something along that line and very similar hues of color, very similar blocks of – now I'm getting a little too technical here. But visual composition of the photo is what I'm after. So similar visual composition. We're always going to use a photo of some smiley person. That's going to be in everything we do. I don't suggest that necessarily, but that's the kind of thing I'm talking about.

That's great. And then point three is keep an eye on the pros. What do you mean by that? Sure. And again, this kind of goes along with the urging toward humility. And just to say it, I'm not saying keep an eye on near agency and what we're doing and copy us. I'm saying like, look at Apple, look at Nike, look at the big players out there. Subscribe to World Magazine or Christianity Today or Modern Reformation does a really good job. You know, there's a lot of really good professional publications, professional websites that are out there. I mean, honestly, take a look at Desiring God and what they're doing and compare your work to theirs. So when you put something on a piece of paper –, Hold it up next to a copy of Modern Reformation and compare and contrast. What am I seeing here? What are the differences? When I make a flyer for an event, hold it up next to an ad you see in World Magazine and say, what are the differences? What are the similarities?

And it's just a way of learning, keeping an eye on the pros. And I urge this for musicians in our church. We have a fairly contemporary style worship service. And so you know we have bands we have guitar players drummers etc um and so i urge them to go actually go to concerts and hear what music is supposed to sound like you know that's um and and then compare yourself and and it's it's urging a spirit of learning spirit of humility um i've got two shelves full of books on design and typography and grid theory color theory that i i'm just i'm self-taught in this area by the way i went to school like i said as i took two years of software engineering that I switched to psychology as what I thought was going to be an undergrad for a divinity degree. Those two things together, by the way, combined into web usability pretty readily. But I have shelves full of this stuff because I'm constantly trying to learn, constantly trying to understand how the pros think, how the big guys have done it, how this historically developed even, like typefaces, where they came from, why we have them, why some look good and some look bad. That's what I'm urging here. And I've noticed in my own circles, my cynical speculation is that people are, signaling their orthodoxy by making their website look as much like it was from 1995 as possible.

That does exist.

See, we don't care what the trends are because our website's terrible. Here's the evidence. Yeah. And it's just, come on. In the first episode, my friend, Pastor Chad Ashby, You made this point that even having a well thought out sign at his church can be a means of loving people by saying, look, I have thought about how I'm going to communicate to you who we are and how you're invited to be here with us because I love you. And by sharing information and presenting ourselves well, it could be a sign of. We're the coolest and flashiest and cleverest, but it could also be, we care about you and communicating to you well. It's a manifestation of hospitality. And I think he kind of made that point that first episode I listened to of yours, and I really loved that point. It's hospitality. One of the, if you're familiar with, I'm sure your listeners are familiar with Tim Keller and his book Center Church. And he has a really good point in there about strangers coming to visit, which by By the way, the Bible urges us to love the stranger and the alien. You know, we are strangers and aliens on this planet, but we're all supposed to love them as well. That's what the word hospitality literally means, love for strangers.

So when they come into our midst, they should be able to understand what's going on, 1 Corinthians 14 says. And so design is actually part of that. When somebody – he has this point in center church. When somebody doesn't know you or doesn't know your subculture within your church, there are common pointers, common points of reference, of cultural reference that they have with you. And it's in the language that you use, the music that you play. And I'm going to add to that the design of your various publications that you have, including your website, including your bulletin design, including whatever flyers or handouts are taped to the wall or whatever. There's a common point of reference that is communicating something to them about who you are. And what you are saying to them when you hand them a poorly designed piece is, we don't care about this ministry. That's the thing they're going to understand. You probably don't mean that. You probably actually do care about your ministry. But because they haven't ever heard you say that before, the only thing they have to key off of is the things that they witness. And if what they witness is bad design, that's the thing they're going to hear from you. Yep.

That's great. And in your conclusion here, you mentioned something that seems to be getting a lot of press recently is a tool called Canva. Yeah. Can you describe just briefly what that is? Probably a lot of people aren't going to be familiar with that at all. So Canva, and there are alternatives I linked to as well that do sort of the same thing. And Canva was just kind of the quick tool. Uh, this is the easy one off the top of my head that, that helps with this. One of the things I mentioned at the beginning of our conversation here was that, uh, desktop publishing tools, they give you the tools, but not the principles. And that's why you end up with a lot of just, um, uh, incoherent design is really the word for it. It's just incoherent, um, Canva, uh, what it does is it's an online tool that gives you some starting templates to choose from to start to create, uh, graphics for the web. So social media, your website, advertising, things like that, just all the different places you need to publish around the web.

And it'll actually publish them there for you, too, which is part of the cool thing. So you can make a bunch of Facebook graphics. And I think the paid version, you can make one graphic and it'll mix it into here's one for Facebook. Here's one for Twitter. Here's one for Instagram, things like that for you, which is a super cool tool. Um and what and so the whole point there is that it gives you uh typeface selections and font selections um and and pre-selected pre-vetted graphics to pull into the design and um uh and it's real drag and drop sort of experience of putting together actually really decent uh, web graphics. So, um, it, it kind of gives you, uh, it's kind of like bumper pulling, you know, so it gives you, it gives you these kind of safety guidelines, uh, to run on to know that you're producing some level of quality beyond what you might pull if you started, uh, with a blank, uh, blank sheet in Photoshop or something like that. Yeah. Yeah. And I think probably just the thought of Photoshop because of its complexity and its price is intimidating for many people. And there are alternatives.

And even I think for those who are doing this very infrequently, the fallback is just using a word processor like Pages or Microsoft Word or something. And there are options that are, A step above that and not terribly complex and not terribly pricey. Canva is one that seems to be kind of taking the world by storm at the moment. It's worth looking into. It's the tool of the moment, that's for sure. And you mentioned they have a free package for 501c3s. So if your church falls into that, you can look into that option. At what point do you think, not simply because you are representing mere agency, But at what point do you think someone should say, this is too much for me as, hey, I'm the pastor or I'm a volunteer?

And when do you say, I think I need to hire someone for this? Do you have any thoughts on that? Well, I'll tell you just to set the baseline in case people are skeptical because I am financially interested in this sort of conversation. Um, our, our church, uh, my church, we engaged a local freelancer when it came to designing our bulletin cover. I didn't run it through my agency. I didn't even suggest an agency. I said, let's find a student who's pretty skilled in this and who's doing freelancing right now and find out what their hourly rates are. And we actually ended up retaining her, uh, for a few, uh, few hundred dollars per month. And, you know, we're a 300 person church. So church budgets are going to vary based on size, obviously. But I'm a big specialization of labor type of guy. And even even your whole your whole premise with your podcast here with the waiting tables idea.

I think that that this sort of area you're going to. Be vastly more efficient in hiring out to a freelancer, uh, this stuff, especially if there's one in your congregation, who's, who's really skilled at it. And, you know, it's up to them whether they want to donate that as their active service to the church. But then I would also pull the worker is worth his wage, you know, pull that verse as well, that you should pay your people, even within your church. Um, now I know church budgets work differently under different, different polities and things like that. But, um, you know, we pay different members of ours for different services they provide because, you know, the group says, you know, this is the thing to do. And the pastors shouldn't worry about this. Even it would even free up the church administrators to not have to worry about this and they could focus on other things. So you're not just, I think a lot of times people look at spending money on things like this as just what the cash going out is. And they forget what the time spent on it by the staff person themselves. Um, the time spent in terms of dollars of their salary and opportunity cost and things like that. So, uh, almost always, I mean.

In our agency, we have our price points based, based on, um, what the market will bear and being a free market capitalist, you're really not going to be able to charge much more than the market will bear in terms of, uh, time saved and, and efficiencies gained, uh, by, by hiring something out. So, um, I, I think I would just start with the assumption that it's probably worth the money to invest in and then, and then do your budget from there rather than, I think we have this kind of scarcity mindset in the church, especially we only have so much money and we have to hang onto it super tightly. And, um, we can't think about spending it because we don't have very much and it's hard to get rather than God provides everything we need for everything we need to do. And so there's an abundance mindset that comes with this idea that our father who provides everything we need owns the cattle on a thousand hills. And if he wants us to do this work, he's going to provide for us to be able to do it. So.

Run into it from that. And think about the return on investment. I always have to talk about ROI when it comes to these things. And, you know, the bottom line for churches is difficult to measure. A lot of times it's spiritual health, it's spiritual depth, right? It is the feeding and caring of the flock.

But there is also the outreach aspect of, you know, are you going to be able to say to somebody, speak, speak to somebody with your design that says we actually care about what we're doing and we're aware enough of you and your life that we care about the things you care about and we're aware of the things you're interested in. And so we can actually, you know, we're going to have something to say to you when you come into our doors rather than we're so obviously alienated from anything that you might be familiar with that when you come in, it's going to be like hearing, hearing Greek spoken, you know, um, does that make any sense? Yeah. I think that's really helpful. And, uh, I, two points I would add to that. One is if you have, um, people in your church who are professional designers or artists or something, I would just encourage... You to remember that these are professionals, right? And they, their work is they work hard, and it takes a lot of hours and, and don't come to someone the night before you need to have a flyer printed and say, Oh, can you just whip up a flyer? Right? You whip up a web page? Can you just treat, treat those people with appreciation and respect?

Yes. Planning is a big part of appreciation and respect and love. Absolutely. Yes. The other thing, something that I've done is there are a lot of ways now that you can get graphic design online through various services. I've used Upwork, which used to be called Odesk, which is where you can hire virtual workers to do little tasks for you. Uh, and so I wanted to get signs made for our church that interior directional signs, where's the bathroom, where's the fellowship hall, where's the nursery. Right. And, and we're just a little church building and I wanted to get some signs made and I tried to put something together and I thought it looked really bad and I knew everyone would be seeing them walking around the church. So I went on to Upwork and described what I was looking for and, you know, said, you You know, I could, you say how many hours you think the job will be and then people can apply for the job and you can select who you'd like to do the job and then they do it and send it to you and they charge you by the hour or by the project or whatever, but you know everything up front and just, it's very easy to do. And I found a Christian designer who did these for us and did a really nice job and has done a couple other things for me since then. And that can be.

Potentially very inexpensive and not a whole lot of work to do. There's another site, Fiverr, F-I-V-E-R-R.com, which is similar. I've gotten some little things done on there. And then you can go from there to looking for something like mirror agency or someone who's doing design work in like a professional firm. And you can find one that's focused on churches and ministries, or you can just, I mean, pretty much anybody probably would take your money for the most part.

There's a number of us out here that are doing it and a number that are doing good work in this area. That's for sure. Yeah, and I guess the old mindset would have been, oh, let's go downtown and find whoever the graphic design firm is in our town and get them to do this. But you don't actually need to, sit across the desk from anyone in 2017 to get this done. You can go online and there are lots of options. Yeah, that's accurate. And even with web projects too, I do, I hear it less and less, but the first couple of years, I heard we want someone local. And the reason was so that they could walk down the street and bug them. Well, you're not going to get a good product if you're walking down the street and bugging anybody. And for the most part, you're going to be interacting by email and phone anyway, you might get an in-person meeting. And if you can find somebody with some skill who's local, all the better. I do agree with that. But the mindset behind having somebody local is going to result in a better project. I guess I agree. And of course, I'm a little biased on that front. We have employees all over the United States and do projects all over the world. So it's worked out so far pretty well for five years here. And we're, of course, It's not the only ones doing it. Yeah. So if people want to find out more about Mirror Agency, it's mirroragency.com.

Anything more that you'd like to share about what you do or offer? Yeah, I mean, we do all sizes of projects. So that's kind of one thing that's new. When we first started, we were pretty much a full custom boutique shop that served larger ministries and larger churches and things like that. But two years ago, we launched Mere Church. If you go to merechurch.com, M-E-R-E church.com, we offer packages for...

For normal-sized churches, I call it not small ones, but normal like yours and mine, you know, the 95% of all churches in the United States are 94. Sorry, 94% of all churches in the United States are under 500 people. And so we have what we call the 94% solution. And we've packaged what we see to be the best themes and plug-ins to get a really effective church website out there. We're bringing to bear the expertise from our work on Desiring God back, you know, 2009 to 12. And now we do ERLC.com. A lot of your listeners might be familiar with that. Matt Chandler's Churches, Village Church in Texas, Matt Chandler's Churches, they launched a resource library with us just recently. And last week we launched Spurgeon.org, bringing all of Spurgeon's sermons online. And we're refining that listing as well. But so we're, you know, we're doing work at that level and but love serving the church at large. Our goal is to serve the church. And, you know, I think that these larger projects serve the church in one way and then church websites proper serve the church in another way at the local level. So I think that's what's unique about Mir is that we're able to bring that international scope on ministry and large site excellence. And we're able to bring that to the local church level. And I think that's actually what's unique about us as an agency.

That's great. And I'm familiar with a number of your client sites, and they're great. So I would encourage people, if you're interested, head over to mereagency.com or merechurch.com, and they have contact forms there. And then Matt's website, where you blog about a variety of things, your headers is webtech, productivity, theology. And that's mattherema.com, H-E-E-R-E-M-A.com. I blog too infrequently there, but yeah, you'll be able to get in touch with me there if you need to. So, hey. And like I said at the bottom of that post on the three tips is if you want me to be brutally honest about what your design has produced, I'm happy to do that. And I'm growing in gentleness and love and humility as well, so I won't bite too hard. But brutal honesty sometimes is – Simon Cowell used to be my favorite individual on the planet. And actually, the last couple of years since he's had his son, he's mellowed out a bit, and I'm learning from that, too. So anyway, yep, happy to help. That's great. Thank you so much, Matt, for joining me on Waiting Tables. I hope I can have you back and hear more from you. I'd love it, Tim. Thanks so much.
