---
title: "Microphones for Churches"
date: 2017-08-24
tags:
    - Waiting Tables
    - Podcast
description: "Todd Messer is back to talk about the basics of microphones for church audio."
---

*Waiting Tables Episode 7 with Todd Messer*

{{< audio src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/waitingtables-media.com/audio/episode-7-microphones-for-churches.mp3" >}}

Todd Messer, my guest from Episode 6, joins us again to discuss microphones in specific detail. Todd discusses the types and uses of microphones with me and gives helpful tips on things to consider with microphone setup.

#### Microphone Physics

There is a lot of physics involved in microphone construction.

It is important to understand [transducer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transducer "Wikipedia Entry: Transducer - Wikipedia") types when dealing with microphones. A transducer takes one form of energy and changes it into a different form of energy. In microphones, there two primary types of transducers: acoustic and electrical.

1. [Dynamic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microphone#Dynamic): Acoustic energy moves a core in a coil inside the microphone generating electrical signal. Dynamic microphones tend to be less expensive and very sturdy.
2. [Condenser](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microphone#Condenser_microphone): A capacitor inside the microphone converts sound to electric signal; a power source is necessary for this type of microphone. Tend to be more fragile and breakable.

{{< youtube Y01N_L1VA4I >}}

Most cheaper microphones are dynamic microphones. They have a much simpler design and construction and subsequently cost less.

Dynamic microphones are not as sensitive. Often, because they are less sensitive, speakers must "kiss the mic" meaning their lips are actually touching the microphone as they speak. If there is too much distance between the speaker and a dynamic microphone, it might not be able to pick up the vibrations necessary to work properly.

With a dynamic microphone, using a [compressor](https://ledgernote.com/columns/studio-recording/what-is-a-studio-compressor-what-does-it-do/) might be advisable. The compressor will help to limit enormous volume fluctuations and variations.

#### Aspects of Microphones

##### Microphone Pickup Patterns

Where is the microphone designed to pick up sound?

- Unidirectional - Sure SM58 is a unidirectional microphone. If you stay close and directly in front of the microphone, there will be good sound pickup. If you turn to the side, top, bottom, or off the axis of the microphone, the sound drops off.
- Bidirection - Sound is picked up in front of and behind the microphone. This type of pickup pattern is useful in an interview setting, where two opposite parties require projection.
- Omnidirectional - Sound is picked up in a semi circle configuration. This type of microphone is useful in a setting where people might be seated in a circle, with the microphone centered in the circle.

{{< youtube q7ihvSdz_vM >}}

##### Wired versus Wireless Microphones:

Wired Microphone:

It is best to use a wired microphone whenever possible.

Wireless Microphone:

With a wireless microphone, you need to keep track of batteries and charge equipment.

Some frequency patterns for wireless microphone setups are actually illegal to use in proximity to, say, an airport or other such facility. Be aware of these sorts of laws and requirements for your geographical area when setting up your sound system with microphone frequencies.

Some setups have the ability to host microphones on different channels, even if they are of the same frequency.

##### Earset versus Headworn Microphones:

Earset microphones are worn on one ear and are potentially lighter weight than headworn microphones.

Headworn Microphones involve hooking mechanisms on both ears, making them more stable and less likely to need adjustment when worn for a longer period of time.

##### Where do you place a microphone?

This involves a lot of common sense. Consider the following:

* What is making noise nearby?
* What is the shape/acoustic quality of the room?
* Does the room echo?
* Are the acoustics such that sound does not carry, that the sound just dies?

Beware of magnetic clashing with microphones which causes the sharp squealing noise.

##### Microphone Tips:

- May need to use a compressor to keep the sound from blowing out.
- Sometimes the same microphone model will be available in multiple pickup patterns. Ensure that the one that you acquire is the correct pickup pattern to suit your needs.
- Maintenance of microphone equipment involves keeping it clean and storing it at a good temperature and humidity.
- For loose sound system cords that need to be temporarily secured, gaffers tape is highly recommended.

### Links

- [Shure MX412 & MX418 Gooseneck Microphones](http://www.shure.com/americas/products/microphones/microflex/mx412-mx418-gooseneck-microphones) - Excellent pulpit microphone.
- [Shure SM58 Vocal Microphone](http://amzn.to/2fvj9LT) - Simple, quality microphone used around the world.
- [Shure WBH53T Headworn Vocal Microphone](http://amzn.to/2vlRQJm) - Headworn Microphone to use with Shure SLX.
- [Zoom H2n Handy Recorder](http://amzn.to/2xcstZm)
- [Behringer C-2](http://amzn.to/2iqrmSh)
- [Rode smartLav+ Lavalier](http://amzn.to/2w3tnqU) - Microphone for iPhone and Smartphones
- [TRRS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phone_connector_(audio))
- [Shure SLX Wireless System](http://www.shure.com/americas/products/wireless-systems/slx-systems)
- [Gaffer Tape](http://amzn.to/2voi7Ub)

## Transcript



Away by my last performance. Yeah, I guess everyone who did get scared away isn't here to hear you. So yeah, sorry about that. If you haven't listened to last week's episode, episode six, you should go back and listen to that at waiting-tables.com. We gave a basic overview of kind of audio equipment and church audio and recording. And today is going to be a follow up on that. We're going to dig in a little bit deeper into microphones because microphones are a surprisingly complex topic. Yeah, definitely. I mean, you know, it's not something as simple as saying, I want a microphone and you just pick one off the shelf. Like, there are so many different stripes and varieties. And it's important that when you're doing a proper sound design and trying to make sure you're getting the right kind of signal and capture, that you're paying attention to what kind of microphone best fits your situation. So looking forward to diving into some of those details today.

Excellent. And I just want to throw out before we get there, if you're going to the website to listen, if you've never subscribed to a podcast before, you can actually subscribe to Waiting Tables. So if you have a smartphone or an iPod Touch or some kind of device like that, or even just an iTunes, you can go into a podcast app or a podcast store like the Google Play Store or iTunes podcast store, and you can search for Waiting Tables, And then each episode will be automatically downloaded to your phone or other device. So if you would like to do that, please do. And I would also kindly ask that if you enjoy this, that you share this with a friend. I'm doing this podcast as a labor of love, and I'm hoping it's going to be valuable to Christ's church. And so if it's been valuable to you, I would love for you to share it with someone else. Todd, thank you again for coming on here. Let's jump in talking about microphones. Sure. Yeah. So where do you want to start?

So there are some obvious differences in microphones, like people know that you can get a wireless or a... A handheld microphone or a wired microphone, a lapel microphone, those kind of things that are obvious when you look at a microphone. But even before that, there are some subtleties that aren't so obvious from just looking at a microphone, right? That's right. So to make it complicated from the very start, we'll throw out the word transducer, which I actually don't know what that word means.

But when you talk about microphones, you talk about transducer types. And so that's kind of how the inside of the microphone is actually working. That's right. Yeah. And it's interesting, you know, Tim, for those of you who don't know, studied physics quite extensively in college. In my teaching career, I also teach a physics class. And so when you actually talk about microphones, there's a lot of physics involved. And of course, any good teacher in trying to relay and educate students has to understand the balance between the technical and the, you know, practical. And so I hope in our discussion. We don't get too technical. But to start off, it is helpful to understand some of the basic physics as we talk about these things. And so when you talk about a transducer, the basic idea in a transducer is that we're taking...

One form of energy and transforming it into another. And in this particular case, we're talking about acoustic energy, energy that's generated by a voice, by a vibrating string on an instrument. And inside that microphone, we're taking that acoustic energy and we're transferring it into electrical impulses, changing it into electrical energy. And that energy is able to be better carried through your cabling and into your mixer or mic system and eventually into your speakers, where the speaker also takes the transducer and takes that electrical signal and energy and transforms it back into that acoustic energy, which is the vibration of that cones.

So when you hear transducer, that's just the basic idea. We're taking energy from one form, moving it into another. And the microphones have three different ways of doing that. It seems there are really two major types of microphones and those are dynamic and then condenser microphones and maybe a third one that is sometimes used is a ribbon microphone as well but probably most microphones if you go to a musician's friend or guitar center or some store like that they're going to be dynamic or a ribbon microphone yeah yeah the ribbon microphone style it's very unique i guess you should say condenser right uh yeah dynamic or condenser so the ribbon microphones are very sensitive and are actually very easy to break, so you don't find those in most settings. Even in a church setting where you may not move the microphone, you generally want to stay away from those. But you're right, dynamic and condensers are the two different types there.

And really, it breaks down to kind of almost an argument of sensitivity.

Dynamic microphones are pretty straightforward. In other words, what you have inside of a dynamic microphone is the acoustic energy that you're generating, again, from your voice primarily. That energy actually moves. Um, something inside the microphone, uh, some type of core that actually goes inside of a coil. Uh, and if you know some basic physics, you know that, uh, if you can change, uh, a magnetic field in a coil of wire, for example, you can generate electrical current. And so that dynamic microphone takes that, uh, very, um, very delicate sound pressure that your voice generates and vibrates. and that vibration then creates the electrical signal. A condenser microphone, on the other hand, uses something basically known as a capacitor. If you've ever seen old cameras that have flash bulbs, for example, you have the idea of what a capacitor does. It stores up electrical energy, and then by changing sometimes the distance between those plates or reaching a certain level of electrical energy, you can then kind of create this momentous pop of energy, And that's what you see in the flash of light there.

And condenser microphones use that kind of capacitor concept to pick up their signal. Now, one thing to note here is that when you're considering a condenser microphone, you have to remember that because it uses that capacitor, you have to be able to supply a condenser microphone with some sort of power source, some sort of electricity, or else the microphone will actually not work at all. For an example on that, our mixer at the church, which we talked about last week, is not a powered mixer, but it does have the option of phantom power for the microphone. So some of our microphones are condensers. And if you don't have phantom power turned on, you talk into the microphones and you hear nothing. And then you just press a button and the mixer is sending some power to the microphone, which enables it to pick up the sound. That's right.

Yep. So as long as you have phantom power, a condenser mic is an option for you. Dynamic microphones, probably if you have a microphone that costs you maybe less than $100, it's likely a dynamic microphone, right? If you have a cheap microphone, it's probably dynamic. And that doesn't mean it's necessarily poor quality or that all dynamic microphones are cheap. But most cheap microphones, that's what they are. Because it's kind of the simplest thing. You talk into it and it vibrates a diaphragm. Right. And the nice thing, too, is, again, you mentioned that price point. One of the things we're talking about here, particularly reaching out to small churches, is how do you do these kinds of things on a budget? Because you don't necessarily have vast resources at your disposal. And dynamics have that lower price point. And another thing to consider, too, is that because of that construction, dynamic microphones tend to be able to take a little more, I don't want to call it abuse. But if you're a little rough or you're bumping into things, dynamic microphones can usually bear some of that brutal treatment a little better than a condenser mic. You know, a condenser mic, you could drop it on the floor, and then all of a sudden those capacitor plates are out of whack, and you could be out of a microphone.

So there are some trade-offs there, but you're right. Just because it's a dynamic microphone doesn't mean that it's poor quality. One of the things with dynamic microphones is it tends to be they're not as sensitive, right? So you usually have to get your mouth right up in the microphone. Yep. And that goes back, we talked last time about, you know, kind of feeling out your space. And maybe we'll talk about that more in a little bit. But with dynamic microphones, and we've mentioned, I think, in the last episode, the Shure SM58. It's kind of that... A standard dynamic microphone that you see at a number of concerts for musicians to sing into. And one of the things you notice at those concerts is that that microphone.

The performing artist, is usually what we call kissing the mic. And that's literally your lips brushing up against the grill that covers that microphone's diaphragm. And to get the best quality sound on those dynamics, you usually want to be close. Now, in some contexts, in some church situations, that'll work, particularly if you have something like what we might call a gooseneck microphone stand where you can bend the microphone more close to the speaker who's speaking.

But, you know, if you've got some distance there, sometimes the dynamics don't have enough sensitivity to pick up over that large distance. And that may be where something more like a condenser mic, like what we typically call pulpit mics, might be of greater interest. So an example of that is my microphone that I podcast with is the Audio-Technica microphone. Atr 2100 and i have to get my mouth right up in it to talk because if i back away like this you suddenly don't hear me as well what did you say very funny uh whereas at our church and we have a pulpit mic which is the the shure mx 412 and you can stand several feet back from that and you you can still hear the person fairly clearly yeah absolutely to return to the phantom power idea a little bit with condenser microphones. If you don't have a mixer that has phantom power, what are the other options for getting power? Because you don't just plug a microphone like that into a power outlet, typically. Right, right.

My knowledge in this area is a little limited, but I do know our pulpit bike, which is a condenser type, if you can't feed it phantom power through the cabling line, some of the microphones will actually come with little packs, and ours actually, it's a little pack. You have a jack that goes to your main line that goes to your mixer, but then you have a smaller type jack that the microphone plugs into. And inside that box is a little place to drop a AA battery. And sometimes that little battery power is just enough to create that voltage difference that you need and actually lift the signal to make the condenser usable. So if you don't have phantom power on your mixer, that's another way to get power into the line. Another option is, we talked about last week preamps, which amplify the microphone a little bit before going into the mixer. If you get the right preamp, which is a separate box that you plug in and then you plug your microphone into it and then plug the preamp into your mixer, Uh, some preamps are going to have the phantom power, so you can enable that and power your microphone. You helped me a few years ago, pick out a compressor for our microphone. So the compressor is a way to keep the volume from blowing out. If someone gets very loud or a loud sound happens. Right.

Yeah. That's always a tricky science too, right? Cause you know, as you, as you just demonstrated moments ago, you know, any time that you move, a certain distance away from a microphone, or maybe move off to the side outside of what we call pickup patterns, you do generate a substantial difference in volume level. Again, there's something in physics called the inverse square law, where it's not just a linear correlation. If I step back one inch, then my volume level is going to go down one, and if I step back two, it's going to go down two. Well, actually, because of the way that sound waves travel, as you increase that distance, you actually kind of reduce the intensity by a square. So one of the ways that you try to fix that is by using something called a dynamic compressor, which basically enables the higher level volumes to get kind of squashed down in intensity. And then that way, the softer sounds and the louder sounds have a tighter window that they fit in. And you may say, well, why is that important? Well, just think about driving in your car, for example, and you're surrounded by road noise. A great way to do this as a radio nerd, just listen maybe to your local classical music station and then flip over real quick to the top 40 hit station.

And you can tell that there's a difference in their audio level. Classical music stations like to preserve that dynamic range, so sometimes when you're listening to it in the car, the sound seems to disappear.

But if you listen to the pop station, you know, they don't really care too much about dynamics. They're more about beat and rhythms and, you know, melodic flashes. That volume level on that station is going to tend to be relatively consistent. And so you can hear it over the road noise. And it's important if you're going to provide sermon audio, for example, to people who might be listening on their car or in their car, that you want to give them a relatively consistent volume level so that they're not having to adjust the volume knob all the time and get annoyed with that. Although one of the nice things about recordings is you can actually do that after the fact. So you can level the audio out after the fact. When we had purchased this compressor, which is a separate unit.

That in theory goes between the microphone and the mixer. It turned out one of the challenges was actually that the compressor didn't have phantom power. So you couldn't plug a condenser microphone straight into the compressor because the microphone wouldn't be powered to send any audio back into the compressor. So to plug the microphone into the compressor and then into the mixer, you have to do the microphone into the preamp to give it phantom power and then into a compressor and then into a mixer. So these things can end up being complicated. And you need to think ahead of time about what you're actually trying to chain all together. Because just because the plugs fit doesn't mean it's necessarily going to work for you. Right. And, you know, we talked a little bit last week about, you know, the tech support from places like Crutchfield or Sweetwater, for example. And, you know, again, while they may be targeting a larger audience, if you will, sometimes when you get confused with, you know, the sequencing there, you know, do I put my compressor, you know, before the input on the mixer or do I do it as an insert on a certain channel or do I output to the compressor and then send the output of the compressor to the speakers?

You know, they can talk you through some of those things in your specific situation and make sure that you're getting the best audio possible. Similar on our last episode, someone also left some really helpful feedback, some of our discussion in the comments in terms of power and speakers and these topics, someone who has experience, which I really appreciated. So you can see that at waiting-tables.com and scroll down to the sixth episode and click on it and you can see the comments at the bottom there. So let's talk a little bit about pickup patterns. And you had tried to describe this last week. And frankly, people would do well to just kind of go Google microphone pickup patterns to understand this a little better because it's a little hard to talk about. But the basic idea is that microphones differ in where they're picking up sound around the microphone. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Go ahead. So you know.

When you're looking at a pickup pattern, right, you're right. You want to find the place where your mic is designed to pick up sound. And, you know, there are generally three different types here. Here's what we call the unidirectional. Of course, the prefix uni meaning one. And that's what we typically find. So we go back to that typical handheld dynamic, the Shure SM58.

That's typically a unidirectional mic. and that's you put your mouth right behind the grill and there's what we call a cardioid or a heart-shaped pickup pattern. And so that means if you stay with your mouth directly behind the microphone, you're going to get a good pickup. If you go a little bit to the side, to the left, to the right, or to the top or to the bottom, as it were, as you're looking down on the mic, you'll still get a decent pickup. But if you move too far, what we call off-axis, then that sound drastically drops off in terms of being able to be picked up. There are other pickup patterns. There are things called bi-directional microphones, which allow to pick up in front as you're looking into the screen, but also directly behind the microphone. I wouldn't generally recommend those for preaching unless you're really looking to pick up clapping in your audience or in the sanctuary, which probably doesn't happen in some of our churches. But that bi-directional has certain applications in other things, in other fields where sound is used. And then the other type is an omni-directional. And this is one situation, again...

I like the unidirectional when it comes to capturing the preaching of God's Word in the sense that there's one primary speaker, and they're constantly preaching out to the congregation. But there may be certain settings, for example, if you have a discussion-oriented Sunday school that you're trying to record. An omnidirectional microphone might be helpful in the sense that you can all sit around a table or in semicircles, or even in a standard pews with the main speaker in the front and the audience in the back, you can use an omnidirectional mic to be able to pick up individuals' questions and maybe other helpful thoughts that a member of the congregation can contribute during that Sunday school. So when you're looking at microphones, those are the kinds of general ideas to pick up. No pun intended. General idea to pick up there, though. And with each microphone, if you look at it on, whether it's on the internet or you go physically look at its spec sheet. A lot of the microphones include what they call a polar graph. It shows you a circle and then actually depicts for you.

The shape of that pickup pattern. So based on your needs and the location of your microphones, you can use that kind of spec sheet to get a general feel for how you want to pick up that audio. For a lot of people, if you're going out and needing to buy a first microphone for your church, you don't necessarily have to be an expert in this. But what we're mentioning is it's kind of worth knowing that different microphones are configured differently. So you might get something And you're like, man, why do I hear so much noise through my microphone? And maybe you have this omni-directional microphone where you're picking up the audience to wherever your speaker is. Yeah, and that's an important question because you want to make sure that you're getting the audio that you want and you want to reject the audio you don't want. And so sometimes we think, oh, well, less is worse and more is better, but not in all context, right? You don't want to hear the air conditioner turning on and blowing across your microphone. You don't necessarily want to hear someone standing up in the congregation having to go to the bathroom. You want to be able to focus your recording on the preaching of the word. This also comes up in a surprising area for me, or surprising for me, that last week we talked about the Handy recorders.

Handy is a brand. They're not just useful, though they are useful. But we have the recorder and the backup recorder we use at the church are both Zoom H2N microphones. So these are two channel microphone, a recorder with two channel microphones. And so the two microphones are built into the recording device. And on top of it is a knob that you can turn that just has some weird symbols on it. And it turns out you can actually change the pickup pattern of the microphone or the configuration based on how it uses the two microphones, which changes the pickup pattern. And so just for recording, you could configure that, hey, I just want to try to get a really good pickup.

Of the speaker, or maybe I want to get a really good pickup of the speaker and then people asking questions in the audience. So I want to have it more omnidirectional or something like that. So knowing what those means is really important to getting that, using that thing effectively. Right. And for maybe more advanced users out there, and you know, this is just something we'll just throw out there, but you talk about having multi-channel recordings or multiple inputs. There are ways that you can arrange multiple microphones in a certain setting and the way you position and orient them, even if you're focusing on just one speaker that allows you to effectively pick up, you know, we talk about maybe stereo broadcasting, so you can kind of get a spatial feel of positioning. But sometimes using multiple microphones also allows you in the post-production process to be able to eliminate some of that background noise.

To be able to find, okay, we're getting adequate signal on both of these microphones, but they're picking up some common noise and we can eliminate that between the two channels in post-production. So for more advanced users, that's something that you can explore as well. Not necessary, but sometimes helpful. Excellent. One other subtle thing to know about is that sometimes the same microphone model can actually have different pickup patterns. A company will make the microphone that looks exactly the same on the outside, but it has a different pickup pattern. So that might be indicated by like a letter after the model number or something like that. Um, but you just want to look into what you're getting. And if you can ask someone in the store through their online support, Hey, is this the right kind of thing for my application? You want to know that you're using roughly the right thing for, for what you're hoping to get, or you might be disappointed. Sure. Yeah. And, and I have a great example that in my school setting, uh, one of the microphones we use, we have a condenser mic, uh, it's the AKG 3000, I think, or it says the C 3000, I think. And it's a nice condenser microphone that I use for our stage productions when we have a Christmas concert, when we have a school play. And what's nice about it is on the back, it has two options for its pickup pattern. You can create a nice kind of hyper-cardioid pattern, so a broad-shaped heart, but you can also change its filter so that it actually narrows down.

So And that's all built into one microphone. So that can be handy if you're looking maybe to pick up one really nice microphone and then use it in multiple settings. Another main category for microphones are wired versus wireless microphones, which is a fairly obvious thing as we look at them. But even within those categories, there are a number of differences and subtleties. So let's talk about wired microphones first. So that's probably the most common thing. Typically, in a professional audio system, or professional just meaning not something you're buying to play around with, like a home karaoke system or something, typically the microphone is going to plug in with an adapter known as an XLR adapter. Is that right? Yeah, XLR is the most common and really the easiest to use type of connector. And when we talk about XLR, there's three letters in it.

And an XLR jack simply has three pins. There's, two pins that carry signal, and there's a third pin that operates as a ground. Because remember, we're transferring electricity. It's similar to the idea of having a ground prong on your wall outlets and plugging devices in there. And the nice thing about XLR cables and XLR connections, particularly when we're talking about the wired microphone, is that the XLR type cable is what we call a balanced audio carrier. And what that means is that in the cable and in the microphone.

The two carriers of audio, the two pins that carry the audio, they actually carry them what's called out of phase. And I mean, here we go talking about physics again. But the idea here is that, you know, if you can think about a shape of a wave, you know, we have a curve that goes up and down and up and down. Well, in the XLR cable, the one pin will carry an up, down, up, down. But then the other cable will actually carry that out of phase. It will actually do down, up, down, up, if you will. And so you carry those on separate channels, if you will, out of phase down to your mixer, and then your mixer can actually reorient that back into the signal. Now, you may say, well, what's the importance of that? Well, if you think about picking up noise along the path of those two wires in your XLR cable, if you pick up noise in that cable, that noise is actually going to be.

Following its own up-down, up-down pattern, but it's actually going to match in each of those pins. So what ends up happening is in that XLR connection, that balanced connection, when you get to the mixer stage and you re-invert to go from out of phase to in phase on your main signal, what that does is then it takes the noise in that second channel and puts it out of phase with the noise in the first channel. And when you have a positive and a negative, a credit and a debit, the up peaks and the down peaks end up canceling out. And so it's a way to eliminate that background noise. And that's all built in to the cabling, to the microphone and your mixer that interprets that sound. Right. Which allows you to not have to think as carefully maybe about where you run their microphone wires because of the way electromagnetic waves work. You can be picking up various noise and things from through the wire, which is a little bit crazy, but real.

And that was actually one of the frustrations at our church with our old system. Because of the way the wires were laid and the age of the wires, we were actually picking up an AM signal in our microphone path. And it was driving me bonkers. You would listen to the recording, and I would be in post-production, and all of a sudden you'd hear some background chatter about horse racing or the latest medical scam that you hear broadcast on AM radio. And it's very difficult to remove.

I mean, it's humorous the first couple of times, but after a while, you start pulling out your hair and you're saying, what's going wrong? What do I need to do? Getting good cables and things like XLR cables, again, with that ground wire woven through with the proper kind of insulation, you can avoid some of those difficulties. And so the other main type of cable that you might see is like a quarter inch jack, right? So that's what often if you see an electric guitar or some other kind of electric instrument, you're plugging in a cord like that. And the cabling often, well, so there are two different types of quarter-inch jacks. One would be a balanced connection, and then one would be a non-balanced connection. But I would guess like an electric guitar and stuff, that would typically be TRS, which is a balanced quarter-inch jack. Is that right? That's right. Yeah. TRS stands for tip ring sleeve, right? And so if you actually look at the jack, you'll be able to see on that jack, a tip ring sleeve will usually have some type of ring in the middle to kind of break up that stock, and that's how you get those separate channels.

You can see quarter-inch jacks that don't have rings on them. That's just tip sleeve, and that's where you get that unbalanced connection. So when you're using microphones that use that quarter-inch jack, you really want to make sure you're getting jacks that have the ring on them. And the other thing, too, to recall with that is you also have to be careful on your mixer side, you know, because the quarter inch inputs that your mixer has, you want to make sure that that's able to carry tip ring sleeve into the input and not just the unbalanced input. So you just have to look at your documentation carefully because unbalanced input on a microphone, you're going to introduce a lot of noise and it's going to be hard to remove that to get a clean signal. So that's another example of, in the audio world, just because a plug fits, it doesn't mean you can necessarily do it. You know, in the computer world, that's often true. If the plug fits, you can just plug it in, I think. I don't know if I would give that as a blanket approval for all things. I think kids would put USBs into HDMIs and Thunder ports into USBs, and you might have a little bit of an issue there. One day when I was very tired, I just kept plugging the USB into the Ethernet port and wondering why my mouse didn't connect. That was very funny. My understanding is typically a TRS jack doesn't carry phantom power, and that's the big reason why we use a different type of plug for microphones. Do you know about that?

Yeah, it's tough. I think the phantom power is definitely, even if it could be transmitted into TRS, which I'm not 100% sure it can be, the phantom power is definitely more reliable on an XLR path. And for example, if you look at, you know, we were talking about preamps earlier, some mixers actually build the preamps into that XLR input. So you plug the XLR in and then there's a preamp right inside of there that then feeds through the channel. So, yeah, if you're looking to use phantom power, my recommendation is just stick with the XLR as best you can. Right. And that's what most microphones are going to be. So within wired microphones, obviously you have like a handheld, just a normal handheld microphone, like the very common Shure SM58 we've talked about. And handheld doesn't mean you always have to hold it in your hand, right? You can also put that in the stand. And within each of these categories, wired or wireless, the pickup patterns could be various things, and it could be dynamic or condenser or whatever.

But we actually use several other kind of microphones at the church. One is we tried, and it's worked with some success, hanging what are called choir microphones. So those are microphones that you see hanging down from the ceiling. And we've tried to use them. In our church, we have an audio system that goes out into our nursery and into the hall outside the sanctuary and various things. And we wanted to broadcast the singing of the church through that system. So we have these choir microphones that are also Shure microphones, Shure CVO overhead condenser microphones.

So they have just a normal microphone cord that's actually built into this microphone. And it's a tiny little microphone that you... I mean, it's called hanging, and that's what you do. You just hang it from the ceiling. And one of the advantages of those is that they're designed in such a way that they're supposed to be hard to see, right? So a lot of those, you'll see them, they'll sell in black or they'll sell in white based on what kind of walls and colors you may have.

And you're right, it's a great way to capture that audio. And it goes back to our earlier discussion in episode six. You have to ask the question, what are your goals when you set up your sound system? And if you're going to stream, for example, if you're going to live stream your entire service to reach out to people who are shut into their homes or maybe injured or sick and can't make it to your church building, you want to consider picking up audio from the choir, from the piano. Get some of that natural sound so that the person at home can make sure that they're able to fully participate and not be distracted by just trying to hear very echoey and empty sound that might just get picked up from the pulpit mic. Another type of microphone we have, they're marketed as being for like a recording studio. They're acoustic mics for picking up acoustic instruments. I actually don't know all the details of this, but we also wanted our piano, which is the only instrument we use at the church. we wanted our piano to go out into the system, into the hall and the nursery and everywhere. And so I did a little research and bought, we didn't need it to be amazing quality. And I bought these Behringer C2 microphones that are, I don't know, $60 a piece.

And they are little condenser microphones. So for the piano, you can't have the microphone right up against the piano because among other reasons, you have all the strings in the piano. And so, you know, you need to be able to set it back so it's picking up sound from all the strings.

And so these microphones are designed for picking up instruments. And they're just little tiny microphones, a few inches long. And they worked fine for the job. You know, I don't know how they are in the grand scheme of professional recording microphones. But they're... Completely different. Well, not completely different. They're different from microphones that are designed for picking up a person speaking. Right. Yeah. All that science, you talk about diaphragms and sound pressure moving cores and applying electrical signals.

Microphone companies do make microphones for specific settings. You were talking about the Behringer. Sure, we've already talked about a number of times. Their SM58 is that typical singing handheld mic but they also make an instrument version called the sm57 and it looks, it's just a very long and somewhat thin black microphone that has a very small cap on the end as opposed to kind of that more round screen you see on the top of the sm58 and if you look at it again going back to a concert setting you know these are the kinds of things that you would put by the bass drum these are the things that you would put over top of cymbals they're the things that you might put next to an acoustic guitar. And again, the idea is that the instruments create different sound pressure levels than a human voice. And so you can design your microphone to customize that a little bit. And again, like you said, you want to pick up the piano so that people can hear it and maybe even sing along with it, whether it's in the nursery, whether it's at home over the stream. It's nice to have that localized microphone just to get a cleaner.

More crisp signal from your instruments. Yeah. Another type of microphone is a shotgun microphone which often you see with like a video camera which is trying to pick up directional sound from a distance or maybe not all shotgun microphones but sometimes that's what you're trying to do is like pickups you know kind of straight ahead but you're not right there we have a camcorder that we use at the church a digital recorder that has a shotgun microphone that mounts on top and i guess the name shotgun is maybe a hint at what it's trying to do, right? Yeah, it's a very apt, it's an apt description. And I actually have one, it's an Audio-Technica ATR-22, I believe, that was donated to my school recently. And it has, it's one that has multiple pickup patterns, but the one is what they call telescoping mode. And you look at the pattern and it looks, it almost looks like a rocket ship. You have a little bit of fins that come off to the side, but then there's a very tall pattern that It aims straight back from that shotgun. And, you know, you think about documentaries. You want to pick up natural sound of a lion laying down in a field. Well, you don't want to get right up to the lion's feet right. And stick the microphone there. So you use a shotgun microphone because that gives you some distance and allows you to focus in on where you're pointing rather than picking up all sorts of sound from all sorts of directions. Have you had that opportunity to mic a lion? Not yet, but I think it's on my bucket list. No, not really.

My cousin is a minister and he's in a pretty small church with a small budget and he has been recording his sermons on his iPhone. And he was asking, is there a better way for me to record my sermons onto my iPhone. And one of the suggestions I gave him was another idea is a, there's a company called Rode that makes a, which is R-O-D-E, making a lot of microphones for like doing video recording. And then they're also making microphones to go along with smartphones. So they have a little microphone called the Rode SmartLav Plus microphone. And that plugs into the jack on the bottom of your iPhone. And I think probably also an Android phone, which is, it's, it looks like a headphone jack and headphones work in it, but it's actually a special kind of jack called a TRRS, which can also take a microphone, which is how you do like.

Headphones with a microphone into your, your phone. So anyway, and then it's a lavalier microphone, which just means it clips onto your lapel, a lapel microphone, and then you plug it sermon right onto an iPhone with a fairly lightweight setup. And I don't have that particular microphone, the Rode Smart Lab, but I have the Rode VideoMic Pro, which I can also use with my phone or with my DSLR camera. And it records really excellent audio. And it's a brand that I really trust. I suspect the Smart Lab Plus is also an excellent mic. And again, we go back to the last episode, we talked about trying to keep things simple and affordable.

You know, the pocket size technology, the power that a cell phone has, you know, our We don't even call them cell phones anymore, right? Our personal electronic devices. You're right. Getting a nice, decent quality microphone, just plugging into your phone and using a simple, sometimes free app. It's a cheap way to make sure that you can get your audio distributed. Certainly that list of types of wired microphones could go on and on, but let's talk a little bit about wireless microphones. I think probably the two most common things people think of with a wireless microphone, historically are a lapel mic, which is just clipping onto your collar or something like we're talking about, and then plugged into a wireless transmitter. And then a wireless handheld mic, which again, people might, I've seen at many churches, they use a wireless handheld mic in a mic stand for the singing or preaching or whatever. But really the microphone component of this doesn't change all that much with devices being wireless or not, but really the big thing is the fact that you then have to transmit the sound back to some sort of receiver. Right. And, you know, going back to my days in radio, I know my radio advisor, he was always very much, look, wired whenever possible, but wireless when you can't do the wire. And it really breaks down to that whole wireless transmission stage.

You're having to make another energy conversion, right, to get that back into a radio wave and then send it from your microphone to your receiver. So you've got this extra encoding, decoding process. You have to worry a little bit more about things like batteries and keeping things charged, which is always a pain. It's amazing how many times... Thankfully, not a whole lot, but you have someone who's in the middle of preaching and all of a sudden the battery dies on that transmitter and you're stuck saying, hey, I have no way to get the audio in if that's your only source. But the advantage, of course, is that wireless gives you lots of freedom to move.

One of the things that we use our wireless for is that sometimes we have an evangelistic dinner in our basement and, And we still want to use our sound system with our speakers that are mounted down there. But we don't have jacks that are convenient in the basement. So we can just use the wireless and transmit through the floor up to our sanctuary level where our sound equipment is. And still get a good clean signal. Now again, wireless transmission, you have to remember radio interference is also a very realistic possibility there. So you have to be a little bit cautious, but sometimes the flexibility just to be able to go wherever is very advantageous in certain contexts. So the wireless systems use different transmission frequencies. And in some areas, like if you live a certain distance from an airport, some frequencies might be illegal for you to actually use.

You have to look and make sure that you're using that legally within your state laws and your municipality and if you're near an airport or things like that. Right. And thankfully, with the transition to digital television, some of the frequencies that used to be a problem are now vacated because they're transmitting further up the spectrum, as it were, not to get into physics again. But so, yeah, you do have to be careful making sure you have a clean channel. And we're not just talking about radio and TV stations. But, you know, if you have wireless phones or if you have Wi-Fi in your church building, sometimes you have to be careful that the frequencies you're communicating on don't overlap so that you can avoid that chatter. Right. So I mentioned last week we use the Shure SLX series. So you need both the receiver and then the transmitter, which is often called a body pack transmitter. So that's just the way you see clipping into your pocket or on your waistband or something. And that Shure system, you can then buy in different frequency configuration. So we have two at our church and then we bought them in different frequencies. But sometimes even if you have the same frequency, you can set them on different channels. So you don't necessarily need separate frequencies for each system. But for every microphone, you need a separate receiver and transmitter.

And those things, and I don't have experience, much experience with other units, but I would highly recommend the Shure setup, and they are $600. So for the full setup, it's a lot of money. Yeah. At my school, we use the Shure, I think it's called the PGX system, and it comes instead of with the lapel mics we're talking about, it actually comes with one of the over-the-ear types, where it actually has clips that go over both ears, and then the microphone comes down a wire close to your mouth. And again, we're talking about a different microphone setup, but same idea of wireless transmission. And on the receiver, it does have the option to seek out the best and clearest channel so that that can be adapted based on your environment. There's actually one other wireless thing that I came across recently. It was, again, from donated equipment to our school. But it was actually a product from Samson. And I think that Shure makes a model of this as well. but it's actually something that plugs in to an XLR port on a standard wired microphone. And it actually just has a capsule for a battery and a little built-in transmitter that you can flip the switch on.

It goes to a receiver as well. So, you know, if you're looking for wireless type support, but maybe already have some wired microphones at your disposal, you may want to look for something like an XLR to VHF transmitter or something like that. And then you can get wireless capability without having to buy new microphones as well. So, Todd, the system that we use, these Shure SLX, those are more expensive than the PGX that you're talking about. But they actually, the transmitter just has a jack that you plug in a microphone to. So it looks like the PGX system, it's kind of a fixed setup. Is that right? So you just, you have a specific microphone. Yep. So that's one nice thing about the more expensive SLX system is we have three separate microphones. So one is a lapel mic that clips onto your suit jacket or whatever, a lavalier mic it's called. And then one is an ear-worn mic, which is what you were talking about. It just hooks on to a single ear, and then it is a real thin wire that comes in front of your face.

My pastor, who one of my pastors was mine and Todd's pastor in college. He affectionately refers to that microphone as the Creflo Dollar microphone. On yeah well whether it's creflo dollar or joel osteen or any of the tbn stable it's amazing how popular those little wires coming it's i don't know if it's just like sophistication or high tech or something well and it really is it's amazing the sound quality you can get out of them but.

You know, you have to make sure that your pastor is comfortable wearing something like that. You don't just want to go out and buy it and say, hey, this is what you're going to use. Yeah. So the third one we have is then called an ear set microphone. So I'm sorry, a head worn microphone. And the difference between that and the kind of ear set or ear worn is that actually wraps around the back of your head onto both ears. And the challenge we had with the single ear one, which is an Elite Core HS09 OSP. I don't know what all those things mean, but bought it on Amazon. On and it's fine and it's very lightweight. Um, and we, we take it and clip the cord back to the, the speaker's collar to try and keep it from getting pulled around by the court. But, uh, inevitably if someone moved too much, it would just get jiggled kind of on their ear. And so sometimes the speaker would be constantly reaching up and correcting it. Right. Or doing the little like Star Trek thing where you're just like constantly keeping your finger on there. And that can be annoying and distracting for everybody. Yeah. So the headworn one that we got recently, it looks like a torture device to put it on. It's a Shure WBH-53T, and it's fairly expensive. It was $200 or $300.

But once you get it on your head, it just sits there, and it's not very noticeable to the audience, and it just works pretty well for us. And I would say the big reason for us going with a microphone like that versus a more traditional lapel microphone is just that the audio quality is better. And part of that is with a lapel microphone, your head is moving around up and down. For example, we just had a guest speaker who didn't want to wear the headworn microphone. So I gave him the lapel and I'm not used to putting it on someone and I put it too high. And when he would...

Turn his head down to read his Bible. It just was way overpowering on the microphone. Yeah. Well, and we talked a little bit about that earlier too, with the whole idea of being inside the pickup pattern of a wired microphone, the same applies for the wireless, you know, and, one of the nice things is that these wireless units, if you're wearing them, that does cut down on some of those distance variations, but you're right. You put your head down to read something, uh, and you're right on top of the lapel. Whereas if you're looking off to the side, you're far away from it. Lapel mics also run into issues of, you know, if you clip it on the tie, does the suit jacket brush into it? Do you hit it as you're reaching for a glass of water or turning your notes? Whereas some of those head-worn ones, the microphone stays at a very consistent distance, which helps with some of that volume variation, keeps you from going over, from peaking your signal output, because when you reach a certain point, you go over top, You just start getting distortion and buzzing and all sorts of nasty sounds. So those headwarns really do provide consistent distance there to keep your volume under control. And I would agree with you that it's probably preferential nowadays with those headwarns to a lapel-type system. I've really been happy with this, the double ear one.

It's really nice audio. I would actually say at our church, my two options for thinking of best audio quality in terms of what's going to end up in a recording, the nicest audio we get is from our Shure MX412 pulpit mic. It's just fantastic quality. So that's like a gooseneck microphone that's plugged in, wired, and connected to the microphone. And it has a shock mount that we drilled a hole through the pulpit and put the shock mount in. It's very nice. Yeah.

It works really well. And then probably the second best quality is this Shure earworn microphone. And I actually didn't really realize until I was preparing for this how much Shure equipment we have. It is a well-known brand that's been around for a long time. And I think I probably just kind of default to them because it is a reliable and their equipment's been good, but other things are good too. I'm not trying to exclude other companies. Yeah. You're not a Shure salesman, full disclosure. That's true. But you're right. Shure has been around for a long time.

You know, there are higher end microphones, you know, that are more studio applicable and there are plenty of lower end microphones too, but you can still find some other reputable brands, you know, Audio-Technica puts out some decent stuff. I had a situation where we were using an Audix pulpit mic for our school's fundraising banquet. Great pickup pattern there, solid sound. So, you know, you can, and when you talk with maybe a sales professional at whatever company or whatever store, you know, sometimes they can give you their own opinion with their own experiences. You know, in this context, this worked better than this. You know, you can think about things like, we haven't talked really about frequency response, But, you know, thinking about what kind of sounds and what kind of color a microphone can pick up, you know, do you want to get something that maybe doesn't pick up on the bottom end as well so that you don't hear the thud every time the pulpit gets hit, you know, and just little things like that.

Even with microphones themselves, they'll have certain frequencies based on the design that they pick up better than others. Does that fall in the vocal range or does it pick up too much on the high end and now you're getting ambient noise from a projector? So there are lots of little details in there too that, again, talk to an expert, try some things out. I don't know, try how easy it is necessarily in some places to buy something, try it out. If you don't like it, return it in good condition. But yeah, there's lots of those little details to consider. Yeah, I think that's a great thing to look into. Can you order something and just plug it in and try it and return it? Look at the return policy. I've returned microphones to Amazon. I'm sure places, Sweetwater, Crutchfield, B&H Photo Video, I think for the most part, those places are going to have pretty good return policies. Maybe even some of your local outfits as well. Guitar Center, I've returned equipment too. We have a local Guitar Center store. You can order from them online as well. Let's talk about a few more things before we wrap up here. Um, one was just some thoughts about where do you place a microphone? And we talked about this some last week. Um, part of it is just common sense, right? Like you don't put the microphone where it's picking up sounds that you don't want into the microphone. And it's tough. I mean, one of the things that I still struggle with in our recordings is we do have an overhead projector that's mounted on our ceiling and we leave it on because we project song lyrics.

And sometimes the pulpit mic is sensitive enough to pick up kind of that wind there. And so sometimes I have to do some destructive noise removal in post-production, which, yeah, it'll get rid of the sound of the projector, but it also takes away some of the color of the vocal that our pastor puts out. And so, you know, that changes the quality of the sound and it maybe isn't as great as you'd like it to be. You know, other things you have to consider as well, you know, and this goes back to the whole dynamic versus condenser thing. You know think about your your stage setup do you have something like in our church where we have kind of a tight rectangular stage that actually almost creates an echo chamber you know and so we get lots of natural reverb and so based on you know the natural liveliness of the room you may want to change how sensitive your microphone is so you can pick up more of a, direct signal rather than hearing echoes now sometimes a little bit of natural echo makes the sound better in some cases. So, you know, you have to feel those kinds of things as well. And I think one other important note that you made mention of is anytime you have something that's trying to pick up electrical signal, particularly the phantom power type stuff, you want to make sure that those microphones are not located too close to speakers. And, you know, there's issues with, you know, magnetic fields interfering with each other. And I think we've all heard the proverbial, you know, testing, testing squeal, you know.

You hear at the concerts and you just want to avoid that because there is potential for damaging speakers and microphones being put in too close of a context there. Also just have to remember that microphones, even though they all just look fixed and don't have moving parts, dynamic microphones do actually have moving parts, right? The diaphragm inside is moving, but audio equipment is going to degrade over time and cords are going to go bad. I mean, that's a real thing. So buying good cords is worthwhile, but also just being aware that if you buy something and just set it and forget it for 20 years, things are going to eventually decay. And so you have to be aware of that and be conscientious of that. Yeah. And it's even little things you may not think about, but you think about, you know, do you get spit in your microphone screen? You know, there are screen cleaners for microphones that are important, you know, especially if you're sharing microphones. You don't want to pass along germs. You want to think about, you know, what kind of temperature and what kind of humidity even in your room. You know, you don't want things to get too dry or too cold.

You know, not that you want to run your air conditioning a bunch extra in the summer just to keep your microphone right. But be careful that you're not exposing your equipment to great extremes for temperature and humidity changes, you know, just to preserve the life of that equipment. And one other thing, and I know we're not talking about cabling, but if you run cables that are on top of the floor strongly strongly recommend something called gaffers tape okay it's a very strong woven tape but it doesn't leave residue on your cables doesn't leave residue on your carpet great grip strength it's it's a bit pricey you can get a standard two inch wide by 55 foot long roll for about 20 bucks on amazon but it's worth the investment um And that comes into play because sometimes you need to put a microphone somewhere and it's not the closest to the jack. So just make sure that your cables are properly taped down so you're not creating tripping hazards or ripping the microphone itself off of, say, a stand and having it fall to the floor and get damaged. So there's some other kind of basic things about microphones. One is windscreens. They can look silly, but a valuable thing. And so that's when you put often a big foam cover over the end of the microphone. We've actually found on our...

Ear set or head worn microphones the windscreen makes a big huge difference with certain speakers, particularly some some people's voices just pop more than others um but they're also tiny little microphones with these tiny little windscreens we've actually found we can like put a little tiny piece of thread through the end of it and kind of tie it on there a little bit or else we were just losing them constantly yeah that's a creative idea shock mounts are another thing just to be aware of i mentioned with our pulpit sometimes you can put your microphone in some sort of mount so that if wherever it's set is getting bumped if it's on a stand that's on the floor that can pick up bumps or something a shock mount helps dissipate the sound before it gets carried into the microphone and stands are obviously their whole thing of their own so we maybe we won't go into that right for today i mean but suffice to say though you know there are different types we talked about gooseneck earlier um there are some that allow you to kind of break off the main pole and set an angle, have telescoping features. And again, it's one of those things you have to figure out where you're located and how to be least obtrusive, right?

And, you know, for a pulpit setting, you know, a lot of pulpits have built-in places where you can, you know, mount your pulpit mic. But if you don't have a pulpit mic or a pulpit that allows for a mic to be placed inside, you know, do you want the stand in front of the pulpit or does it have to be off to the side? And again you have to start thinking about you know how far away is the speaker going to be from my microphone is it going to pick up adequately and sometimes a good stand a good mic stand can actually enable you to to close that gap and and be less obtrusive while also maintaining better sound quality todd thank you so much for coming back on the waiting tables podcast it's been a pleasure tim look forward to hearing more of your work.
