---
title: "Managing Church Projects using Basecamp with Seth Houser"
date: 2017-10-19
tags:
    - Waiting Tables
    - Podcast
description: "Seth Houser talks about how his church adopted the Basecamp software to manage their projects and communicate."
---

*Waiting Tables Episode 11 with Seth Houser*

{{< audio src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/waitingtables-media.com/audio/ep-11-managing-ministry-projects-with-seth-houser.mp3" >}}

In this episode, I talk with Seth Houser ways in which ministry projects can be effectively managed.  Seth's serves as a summer camp director for a Christian camp in the Smoky Mountains, and he also serves as an elder in his local church body.

Seth shares how the leadership of his church adopted [Basecamp](https://basecamp.com) as a tool for organization, communication, and collaboration.

Using software can help you delegate projects, keep track of projects once delegated, and remind those who've taken them on of their responsibility. Having a way to keep track of what has been decided in meetings and what thought processes you went through to get to that point is invaluable.  If someone in your congregation comes to you asking about a specific topic that has been debated and decided upon, you can draw on those records to walk them through explaining the thought process behind the decision.

### Links

- [Camp Arrowwood](http://thebestcamp.com/) - Camp where Seth works
- [@CampArrowwood](https://twitter.com/camparrowwood) - Seth Houser on Twitter
- [Basecamp](https://basecamp.com/) - Project Management & Team Communication Software
- [Basecamp Nonprofit Pricing](https://help.basecamp.com/basecamp/questions/156-do-you-have-special-pricing-for-non-profits-universities-or-other-groups-in-need)
- [Trello](https://trello.com/) - Alternative project management software
- [Slack](https://slack.com/) - Team communication software
- [Task and Project Management for Churches](http://headhearthand.org/blog/2015/09/14/a-big-opportunity-to-serve-the-church/) - Post by David Murray
- [Google Docs](https://www.google.com/docs/about/) - create and edit documents online, for free

## Transcript



Today with Mr. Seth Hauser, who is the director of Camp Arrowwood in Wears Valley, Tennessee. And he's also the recreation director at Wears Valley Ranch, which is a home for children from crisis family situations where I worked with Seth many years ago. Seth is also, he was very keen to have me mention the creator of the 1300 member global group of challenge course professionals. Seth serves as an elder at his church in Maryville, Tennessee. And after my interview with Tim Challey, Seth and I started talking about how church leadership teams can apply the same sort of thinking about productivity and organization at a team level. And Seth is going to share with us some about how he has done this at his own church and moved away from long, complex email threads to better electronic communication and clearer record keeping and planning. Welcome, Seth. Cool, Tim. Good to be here with you. Thank you for thinking of this idea and wanting to talk about this. Let's kind of start at the beginning and why have you been thinking about these things of project management and organization and communication in the context of your own church? My job year round is I'm a summer camp director.

Like you said, at Camp Arrowwood, the best camp. You only work two months of the year, right? Yeah, right. That's what everybody says. Yeah. The fall is spent on fantasy football and the spring is planning vacations and things. A lot of the problems that I have run into with running my own small summer camp, I noticed were also problems that were at our church. So a little background on our church. Our church, when I first got there, I think we were doing it. We had about one service, 180 members.

Great church, loves Jesus. Our mission is to declare, disciple, and demonstrate. And as we got bigger and brought some more elders on board, it was just really frustrating, all the lost conversation, all of the lost...

Like, brainstorming and project playing that was done on email, and it would just be lost. You know, we would try to recall these long-threaded conversations about why we were choosing this Sunday school class, and when we would try to recall it, it would be a 40-email-long thread on Gmail, and it's just almost impossible to figure out, okay, what were we praying about then? What were some of our thoughts? What were some other options? And it's just really frustrating And for us to try to serve our members and to do as much ministry as we can, there had to be a better way, and that was to get off email. I've seen that also. And even just in meetings, I think particularly doing things as volunteers, you make plans in a meeting and then you don't meet again maybe for another month or a quarter or whatever, and they're like, oh, what did we decide? And if you don't have good records somewhere, whether you keep minutes or whatever, you just keep repeating the same discussions.

Yeah. And I think for us, it wasn't just what did we decide? But the really important thing for us was like, was why did we decide this? And so with, you know, with where we've kind of landed using Basecamp, we can recall exactly, you know, pros, cons, what different people were praying about, different options. It's just, it's really helped us out a lot. Yeah. So we'll talk more specifically about Basecamp in a minute, but maybe the realization you all had, or maybe you didn't, I don't know, but in the professional world, these kinds of things are related to the whole idea of project management, which is not the specifics necessarily of what you're doing, but the kind of process you're working through to make something happen. So in your church, if you're planning a Sunday school class or something, there are just a lot of steps and moving parts that you have to keep track of. And did you start to think about it in that framework or have people who had project management experience, or was it largely you driving this as from your own camp experience? Yeah.

I mean, basically, the reason I really got turned on to project management software was about four years ago, I had a young lady that was doing an internship with me in the summer. And I just talked to her. I said, hey, before we start working um hey tell me how you get things done like how do you study what's your what's your day-to-day like how do you how do you get things done at your school and she said well i make lists she goes i love lists i wake up every morning and i make lists and i make you know i have i'm sticky notes and i have different colors and all this and um i said okay and she said well how do you do things and i said um i said i've got this crazy you know roller coaster task list in my brain and It's not on paper. It's definitely not digital. And so at that time, I thought, man, I need to come up with something where we can communicate. And she's not constantly saying, Seth, what do you want me to do next? What do you want me to do next? What can I do next?

So about that – actually, that summer was the time when we looked at different project management software. And I started using one. And I've used it ever since. And now not just our camp is using it, but also –.

Our whole ministry, Where's Valley Ranch, is using it, and now our church and several other places. And the way I found it was just by just talking to some of my friends that I knew were pretty slick technology guys and used some different project management software and kind of talked to them about what I was looking for. And they suggested some, and then we kind of just began the process of looking. And so to answer your question, I was really excited in driving it. But then our youth pastor is good with technology. And so he kind of looked at some things. We kind of bounced some ideas off each other, but it was mainly us too. I think it's worth mentioning, as Tim Challies and I talked about in the earlier episode, if you're thinking about doing something like this, it's worth not just thinking about tools that are a solution to these problems, but also thinking about a system that's going to work for you. So you've mentioned Basecamp already. That's a particular tool. Yeah. But the reality is, at some level, you could apply these things without necessarily using specialized software. Maybe it makes it a lot easier. But you also want to think about, like, what are we really trying to get done here? And be careful not to let the software drive what are we trying to get done instead of...

Purpose and mission of our church and our team. That's a great word. And it's, you know, you could automate even, I mean, as an elder, if you wanted to, you could use technology tools and automate, you know, I'm praying for you text to go out to different members of your body, you know, all throughout the week. And I mean, that's not serving the Lord, you know, at all. So no, that's, yeah, no, that's a great point. At one point, there was some kind of phone app that reminded you and pre-generated text messages to send to your wife. Oh. Like, I love you. It just would pop up a reminder. So it's a similarly bad idea. Side note, but one app that Tim Challies recommends that I have used for a while is Prayer Mate, where you kind of type in. Yeah. Which, I mean, I would suggest that too. Sorry, we'll get back to project management. There's a good post from David Murray, who is a prolific blogger at headhearthand.org. That he had written back in 20... 2015, looking for the title is task and project management for churches. And what he was looking for in particular was helping keep track of kind of pastoral needs in the church. So maybe not so much broader projects in the church, but how do we as the elders and pastors in our church actually keep track of how we're caring for people and what's going on with people and what we've done in the past. And I've talked to one of our elders.

He's had that same question of, how do I just keep track of this? And not to depersonalize the whole situation, but just to help me keep records of what I've done because it's so easy to forget the conversations of everything. Are you using your tools in that way or is it? Yeah. I guess to start with, what's interesting is that I found um david murray's blog i was like oh sweet someone has blogged and they've got a great answer and as i read his blog he said i'm still looking for a solution you know that does all these things and so i thought well base well base cam i think can do all those things and so so yeah let me back up so we kind of looked at lots of different solutions we looked at um slack uh trello is one that's out there a lot of people like um, obviously Basecamp, and even looked at maybe just using Google, because we were already using Google Drive with our meeting minutes and some of our church documents. And it was like, well, we could kind of use that.

Anyway, we landed at Basecamp. And to answer your question about how we use it, yeah, we absolutely do use it for those pastoral care situations. So within Basecamp, Base Camp has projects, and so we've got different projects. Elder Business Meeting is a project room where we can chat and post documents and things like that. But then we also have a project called Elder Prayer and Praise where we do exactly what you're talking about. Like we will put a specific prayer request on the board and then kind of tag information about I'm praying for them. Hey, this couple wanted us to come over and pray for them and anoint them with oil. Hey, that's happening. I can be there. I can be there. And then we can kind of just track and make sure people are getting the care that they've requested.

And then you can also set reminders for all those things, too. Yeah, yeah. Reminders are so helpful. And just to backtrack a little bit to David Murray's post, I emailed him, I don't know, at probably the beginning of the summer and said, hey, did you ever find anything good here? And his reply was basically no. He didn't find something he was really satisfied with. So I think there's opportunity in the future for people to continue to think about this. But unfortunately, it's probably not big money for a software developer to do this. And I think that there are a couple church-wide solutions that people have put out there. I know some people like the town and a few other things. But we looked at that.

It was just like, man, it'd be hard to get our whole church body to get on a whole other platform. Right now, Base Camp is just set up for the elders have a couple projects. The youth pastors and his helpers have a couple projects, children's ministry, and then there's a technology group and some things like that. But right now, it's mainly just staff and volunteers that are communicating on Base Camp. Let's talk about maybe more of what Base Camp actually is. So probably some people listening to this, hopefully some people listening have never heard of Slack and Trello and Basecamp and these kind of things. But these are web-based software tools for kind of project management and communication. But can you describe Basecamp a little more as to just what do you get when you log in and open it up? Yeah. So Basecamp goes across all platforms. So it's web-based. You don't need to be tied down to a piece of software that's installed on your computer. So it's web-based. So you can pull it up on a browser. You can download the app and use it on your phone.

And if you've got light internet, you can interact with Basecamp just via email. And so it's easily accessible from any kind of technology that you're on. And what it basically does is Basecamp kind of puts everything in one place. So emails, chats, reminders, calendars, groupthink, project planning. It kind of just takes all those things that right now you might be using phone calls, text, emails, Word documents, Google documents. It kind of takes all that and puts it in one place so that it's easily accessible and it makes it very easy to recall information and to kind of sort through things. So instead of... If you're like me and you're like, hey, I wrote this document two years ago. I need to find it. All right, I'm going to look at Dropbox first. Not there. Okay, I'm going to look at Google Drive. Not there. I'm going to look at this. Not there. If it's on Basecamp, great search tool. You can find everything.

And I found it's very collaborative. So it's just easy for people to all talk in one threaded conversation that's searchable. And the learning curve is really easy. So I would say on our elder board, our youngest elder is 38, maybe, which is me. And then I think we go up to, oh, man, this is dangerous water, 65 or 70, maybe.

And man, that guy uses it just as much as I do. And so this was a solution we found that would work for our particular church. I think there are several challenges in getting to use something like this. One is the adoption challenge. Can you actually get people to use it? Because you can start things like this all day, but if people don't bother using it, then it's just another thing that's out there. And another challenge is, I mean, I guess it's a similar thing, but is keeping something up to date and actually maintaining it and being functional. And one of my concerns about adopting something like this is that there's gonna have to be a lot of time spent sort of cleaning things up and reorganizing. And so are you having to do that Or is the way you've got it set up just kind of flow naturally? We brought new elders on in January. So that seemed like the most logical time to kind of switch. So we brought on, I think, six new elders in January. We have a total of 11 right now. And that seemed like the best time to kind of transition from email slash Google Drive slash Google Hangouts to Basecamp. Basically, what we did was we took some time during one of our first elder meetings, just kind of talked through Basecamp and we...

Our church secretary, who's an elder, he put Basecamp up on the big screen, just kind of walked through a couple different things. Like, hey, we actually just kind of walked through every single form of communication. Here's where it goes, and here's how we're going to move it around. So prayer requests, here's where it goes. Hey, every elder has an area of responsibility. That's a project. Here's where it goes. Hey, we're going to talk about future planning. Our church is growing. here's the future planning project and and and here's how you're going to kind of comment on that um now migrating over to it took a while um base camp is it's kind of slick so instead of chat or um or texting it's called pinging and so you know there's always you know i pinged you and i can't find it and yes it's definitely some frustration but i would say after about two or three months We were all in on Basecamp, and I would say we've ended in a really good place. We're a lot more functional. We're able to serve our body a lot better. And at first, there would still be some emails, like, hey, here's an email from the pastor. And I would, on purpose, just hit reply all and just kind of bury it and write, hey, guys, I posted this in Basecamp. So I would move an email over to Basecamp and hit reply off so people had to work hard to find emails.

Right. So just some nudging to keep people moving in that direction. Yeah, I call that gospel. That's gospel nudging. Gospel-driven nudging. That's a trademark, Seth Hauser. Can we talk through a specific use case just to help people get a more concrete idea of what this looks like? And I don't know if you have a good idea, but maybe, you know, say you're going to have a special service at Christmas or something, or Vacation Bible School. What does it look like in the actual steps in this tool? We just had our 15th anniversary. I mean, it was about a year ago, but...

Just to kind of walk through how you would use base camp for that. So 15th anniversary, we had it in a giant park, a park that hosts big concerts. And so there was a lot of different projects and tasks that needed to be done. So there was food. There was a sound system. There was rentals that needed to be made. There was recreation. There was hospitality team. There was the actual church service itself. There was also like, are we going to buy T-shirts, water bottles, things like that. And so you've got all these different projects and tasks that need to happen, but there are only certain people who need to know about food. There's only certain people who need to know about renting and setup. There's only certain people who need to know about hospitality. There's only certain people who need to know about all these different things. And so for us, it was really easy was using Basecamp to just kind of separate those things into projects, then under those projects, turn those into tasks. And so I had one gentleman that was in charge of food. He was in the food project, and there's no need for the senior pastor to know what our cost per hot dog is or what our cost per bun is.

Jonathan was in charge of food, and so he's got this project. I can check on him. I can have deadlines and he can say, Hey, here's what I can do with costs. Here's how we're going to serve it. Here's how fast we can get people through. And then it's kind of, I can just kind of look overhead from a, from a thousand foot view. Oh, food's good.

Um, we're ready to go on that. Okay. Then looking at, you know, chairs, hospitality, all that just kind of, that's like you using it like a document at some level. Is that how those things are being entered just as a, no, those things are being, are being entered as, as, um, as tasks. Um, So deadline task, hey, by Wednesday, get five estimates on chairs, on renting 300 chairs. And then rather than us having a phone call or a conversation, he can just post it under that threaded task. So the task has a comment box or something where you can then have. Yeah, absolutely. If you want to go back, then that task information is, if you're like, oh, what did we decide on that? Then you can go back, pull up that task, and then you can read through the thread specifically about that. And I can even, not only on the task can I assign it to a certain person with a certain deadline, but Basecamp keeps track of that. So I can even just go into, I can click on maybe Jonathan that's doing the food. I can click on his name and I can see everything that's currently on his plate that he's working on. And just kind of, so when I call him, I'm not just checking on food. It's like, oh, Jonathan's also doing, helping with the sound system. So that can be that same conversation because I can kind of look that up and reference that. And then you can also attach other things, right? So it's not just text, but you could include a picture or if you want to, if you have, maybe you get a price document, like a PDF, you can attach that, right? Yeah. Text documents linked to cloud storage, schedule out things.

You can even have automatic check-ins, which is really nice. So, hey, every Tuesday at this time, it's automatically going to check in with these people. What does that actually mean? It sends them an email? Basically, it's just going to buzz them and say, how are you doing with these projects? You can click it to say, like, are you blocked on anything? How's it going so far? Can you give me a status update? And so that can be helpful if you're managing a lot of people and you forget to check up on your people. And automatic checking can be really nice. Yeah, 15th anniversary was one. One more, even more recently, and this is a great example of elder collaboration on Basecamp. Was as elders, we want to talk about online giving. Like, hey, should we move to online giving? And so at first, I'd say about half the room of the elder board said, I don't quite know how I feel about elder giving. It seems so impersonal. And so for the next week, we just had a conversation. So we started a project called Thoughts on Online Giving. And so people were praying about it and doing research. And just kind of we had a really nice threaded conversation of, hey, here's prose. Here's cons.

Here's how some people have done it. Here's how some other people have done it. And then as a board, we were unified. Hey, let's do it. Let's do online giving. We think we can serve our body best by bringing that on board to our website. And so collaborated, prayed, collected information, became unified. Yes, let's do online giving. Now we shifted from yes to another project. And this one didn't need to involve the whole elder board. this one just involved three people and now we're answering the question was okay we're going to do it how do we do it so we looked at You know, different options, you know, easy tithe, tithe go, missions go, just things like that. And so that was just three elders who kind of peeled off of that one and just collected information about how it works and different credit card rates, how intrusive they are, how easy they are to use. And then we reported back, hey, here's what we're seeing, guys. We think we should pick one of these two. And the elder board could kind of research those. So by the time we got back to our meeting, so we start out our meeting on one Wednesday saying, should we do online giving? And we're about 50-50. By the time we get to our next meeting, we'd already agreed to do online giving and had chosen the best platform to do it with no emails involved.

That's really powerful. What I like as well with our project management software is if a member is like, well, why did y'all choose to use online giving?

I'm not like randomly searching for emails. I can say, hey, here's some of the things we talked about and here's why we're really excited about our church body with online giving. Do you know that our missionaries who are in Poland, like we can give to them now easier or they can give or if you're out of town, you can give. If you forget your checkbook, you can give. But it's nice to be able to recall like our thought process. Right. That's really powerful. And do you use this when you have meetings? Are you using it to keep minutes or notes from the meetings to join that together? Every elder meeting goes on a project called Elder Minutes. But we actually do our note-taking for our meetings on a shared Google Doc. And it integrates really nicely. So you can link to the Google Doc from within Basecamp. Yeah. That probably isn't searchable, the text of the Google Doc. No, it's not. No, it's not searchable. I mean, they play pretty well together, but it's not fully integrated. And the reason we aren't using – so Basecamp does have like a native document thing on Basecamp. I don't know. In case we ever have to get off Basecamp, it's nice to have just our Google Drive that still has all of our church documents and things like that on there. Right. Yeah, I've used that and found that to be really powerful. And for those who haven't tried using Google Docs, if you are emailing around Word documents and people editing them for churches, Google Docs are a great solution because everyone just goes right on and can edit the document. Yeah, there's nothing worse than emailing Word documents back and forth.

Yeah, and particularly if you don't need some of the professional level features or if you're not going to publish it or something, it's just a pain. And Google Docs work really well. I've introduced a lot of people to Google Docs through my involvement in church. Great collaborative tool. I mean, like Google Docs and Drive could almost do everything we needed, but just felt like it was lacking a lot of the collaboration and the recall of information that we needed. Google Docs recently added a feature where you can type a task in a Google Doc and then you can assign it to a person. But it is a very basic implementation, and it doesn't help you to actually keep track of all the tasks you've had and send reminders and various things. I would not really recommend relying on that. Do you pay for Basecamp? Yeah, so we pay for Basecamp. There is a nonprofit rate.

I feel like it's somewhere around... 200 to 200 to 300 dollars a year maybe um and that's unlimited projects unlimited users and so um not just so the elders using it but the youth the youth pastor uses it he's his own little group with high school leaders and things like that and it is and some of you probably are wondering hey i don't want everybody i don't want youth leaders seeing everything we talk about as elders and you can separate projects and that's very easy to do so you're still um are are guarding people what i'm seeing on their website is like $900 a year.

I don't know if you have a different rate, but in any case, that does seem like a lot of money at one level, but for the value you're getting out of this, it seems like this is just clearly worth your money. Yeah. I know we don't pay that. I don't know. Yeah. I like to negotiate and I know there's a special rate for nonprofits, but yeah. I mean, if it's $900, then that's less than a hundred dollars a month. And if that enables you to serve your body and glorify the Lord more and to bring more people to Him, that's totally worth it. Yeah, and if you have your elders spending less time hunting through their email, they can be doing other things with their time. I've found a number of paid web-based tools that I've used in my church that have been so valuable. Flocknote, I did an interview with them about Flocknote communication tool. And we pay for a web-based accounting software at our church and a few other things like a reimbursement tool. And it's just really worth the money for so many of these things. And another way to look at it actually is you could be paying someone to be doing all this, like the price versus maybe having an administrator who's dedicated to handling these kind of tasks is relatively small. Sure. And for small churches that have one, two, or three full-time employees...

Their time is worth a lot, and they have a lot of counseling on their hands that they're doing and ministering to the body.

And just whether it's Flocknode or some of the other tools that we've mentioned.

They can just make a huge difference in your body if you're willing to make the investment. So for the most part, this is used among leaders and volunteers in the church, but it's not being used by the congregation.

I would say the congregation as a whole, we do have a church friends Facebook page. And so people can talk a little bit on there. We have a small group leaders page that we use as well. We did look at like, you know, getting on the town or one of those other church social networks. But my experience has been and look in our body. I just don't think people are going to want to go to a whole nother social media platform when they're already on Instagram, Twitter, Facebook. Oh, I need to also go check this church thing. So right now we're not doing anything for our body there. Yeah. And I think that probably makes sense. And I would encourage people, if you're going to try something like this, don't necessarily just try to get everyone on it from day one, even all your various whatever leadership teams, elders, children's ministry.

Those various things, but maybe just give it a trial with one group. And potentially a way to sell this is to let people see that it's, to sell it in terms of getting people to use it, let them see that it's valuable for your projects and say, oh, get them to where they're saying, oh, what's that? Tell me more about that. And I can recall when we were having a conversation about what our next Sunday school class was going to be. This was right after we started using Basecamp. And somebody said, well, what did we do last fall? And I said, I don't know. Let's spend five minutes checking our email, seeing if we can find what we did last fall and then finding what we thought about doing last fall. And once you show people it can be a useful tool, like you said, then people will start using it.

I kind of approached it, or we kind of approached it like the same way I approached my mom and her iPhone. It's like, Mom, if you can learn one thing a week on your iPhone, if you can utilize one feature, then, hey, by the end of the year, you'll be pretty good on your iPhone. But if I just... Pull out her phone and show her 20 things, it's not helpful at all. It's exasperating. One of the things I was wondering about is how do people find out that there's new content on Basecamp? So if they have the phone app, are they getting notifications?

Yeah. So what's really nice is, so it seems like every app, every website now wants permission for notifications. And so with Basecamp, you can turn on as many notifications as you want, or you can turn them all off. So you can say, hey, I only want notifications on the Elder Prayer and Praise Project because if there's an emergency, I want to make sure that I'm praying for those right away. But I'm going to future church planning. I want to mute all those notifications. So it's really nice and user-friendly how you can choose different notifications. So if you have an Android or iOS phone, it can buzz your phone and give you notification.

If you want, it can give you an email every single time somebody updates Basecamp. And what I've got is I've got all my notifications off, and I get an email every morning telling me what happened the previous day on Basecamp. So that's what I do. And then if somebody pings me, which is the same as like a group text message, that'll come through to my phone, and that's going to be more of an emergency.

Hey, I'm sick. Can someone fill in on call to worship? Or, hey, can somebody fill in for me on this Sunday school class? Or this person wants to be prayed over after first service. Can anybody be there? So there is kind of the pinging gap. Group text function there too as well. Does it have the ability to reply to threads from an email if someone wants that? Do you know if that's possible? That was one of the reasons that we really wanted to use Basecamp was because if there were some of our leadership who don't like apps and aren't very techy, it's like, well, we don't want to leave them out and just be like, oh, they're doing their kind of young person Basecamp thing. Yeah, you can click reply on an email and it'll go right back and be right in the thread of that Basecamp project, which is really nice. Yeah. And then people can selectively choose if they want to be getting those emails. I turn off all my emails except for that summary that I get every morning. My pastor had asked me about a similar tool several months ago, and I had recommended to him a competitor of Basecamp called Trello, which it's not identical, but it's a project management tool. And we've been experimenting with that. I'm a little bit nervous. Since Since I've been talking to you about Basecamp, I'm feeling like I need to go back and tell my pastor I recommended the wrong thing. We should switch to Basecamp. I don't know. I'm sure they're similar.

Another thing when you're asking about how do you find out about activity or notifications and things like that, Basecamp's got this really cool feature called latest activity. You just click on it, whether it's on your app or on your desktop, and it'll show you just a timeline of today at 1115, these people were chatting. And so I can go and get in on that conversation or, hey, last night, here's like, I'm just looking at mine right now. Here's an elder reporting on prayer time last night. And so I can kind of see a very neat timeline of everything that I missed. People can find out that you're checking the prices of hot dogs during the worship service. Absolutely. Yeah. Have there been any downsides or things that you wish would be better or different? So I think A challenge for most churches is, hey, how do we track visitors and how do we reach out to them, interact with them, keep track of who's connected with them and who hasn't and who's coming to the visitor's luncheon and who's not? And so for that to work, we would need all of our small group leaders and door greeters and, I mean, everyone we have to be able to enter information on tracking our visitors. And right now we're using a program called Touchpoint is what we use for kind of our church membership and things.

And that doesn't play well with Basecamp. And so I wish there was – that's something we're kind of talking about right now is how can we do a better job of tracking visitors and following up with them. Because right now we're kind of sending out an email. Hey, these are the first-time visitors. These are the second-time visitors. Then once that email is sent out to all the small group leaders, then the small group leaders are just like, oh, I know this person from high school. Well, I'll call them, but there's not a whole lot of tracking there. So I don't know... Of the best way to do that using Basecamp, because that'd be kind of onboarding a whole lot of people onto our Basecamp. I would also say if someone's going to be using any tool like this, and frankly, any online thing, including email, you need to give some thought to the security around this, who is seeing what. And even if you're choosing a new tool to try to vet at some level the security practices of a company like this, because you don't want all your private elder communication at some point to get released on wiki leaks or something and and that was something we talked about was as we as as elders roll off the elder board new ones come on i mean.

As they come on to base camp are they going to be able to see everything that we've talked about for the past six years because you know there's sensitive you know lots of sensitive relationship and pastoral care discussions that are going on on base camp and so how do we do that and um base camp does a really good job. You can, when you unload people, you can say, Hey, they can only see from here, from here to the future, unless they get tagged into older conversations. That's a really nice feature. I'm just to throw this out there for people. I mean, this is true for email too. And I mean, people can get copied on email threads or an email isn't maybe totally secure. So if don't think you're safe just because you're sticking to email. But all of these things have some amount of risk involved in them. And I think we're going to have to increasingly think carefully about that. We see... News about various data leaks from all kinds of things all the time, churches are not going to be immune from that. That's a great point. And I think that every listener could recall some email they got that was reply all, and it was the dreaded reply all that either was just meant for one person, or it was one where it was like, well, I need to get these people in a conversation. I found this old thread. Let me add some new people. And wow, there's a 50 thread email with all sorts of personal information on there that you just kind of threw out there for everybody. We actually had that at our church. At one point, we had emails that were incorrect.

Email addresses to our church domain, just deacons, and someone tried to send an email to the pastor and misspelled the email address. Oh, came to all the deacons. Came to us and yeah, we disabled that feature after that so the emails would just bounce.

We didn't want involved in that. But unfortunately, these are going to be big issues, I think, in the future, and it's worth thinking about now. And if tools like these have two-factor authentication where you have to get a, a text message or whatever before you can log in. I highly recommend enabling that. And I don't know if you saw it on Basecamp, but yeah, it has two-factor authentication where when I log in, it's going to text me a four-digit number to my phone and I have to enter that to get on the app or to get on my desktop, which is really nice. Yeah, it's a small thing, but that keeps someone from guessing your password or whatever.

It's worth doing. I just want to also throw out, if anyone's listening to this and you've thought about these issues or you've found solutions for your church, I would really love to hear how you're working on this. I think it's a struggle that a lot of churches are going through and trying to think about. And I don't know that we've found all the answers. Seth probably has, but I haven't found all the answers. So I totally want to continue the conversation. At waiting-tables.com, you'll be able to comment on this episode, or you can send me an email to Tim at waiting-tables.com. Seth, is there anything more that you'd like? I think you've made a lot of good points. I think it's really wise to think about your individual church and the mission that God's given you and your body in that church. And whatever solution you choose, is that going to be a solution that your whole church, your whole elder board, your whole church, all the church employees can use? Because it might be the coolest, slickest tool ever that can do every single thing, but if nobody uses it, it's not worth anything. And so really make it collaborative as you kind of roll it out. And you've got to slowly roll it out so that people see the benefits. And, I mean, email is easy, and people love their email. But once they see the why of using some project management and group collaboration tools, I think they'll love it, and it'll serve your body really well.

This is the Waiting Tables Podcast. You can find out more at waiting-tables.com.
