---
title: Triviality and Education
date: 2008-04-27T12:00:00.000-04:00
tags:
  - Writing
---
> “People don’t talk about anything!” <br>
> “Oh, they must”  <br>
> “No, not anything. They name a lot of cars or clothes or swimming pools mostly and say how swell! But they all say the same things and nobody says anything different from anyone else.”

In a culture that attempts to present truth apart from value and information apart from discernment, a man can do little more than to seek after the pleasurable. The purpose of education—the purpose of life itself—is not to fill oneself with superficial pleasures. A man who lives his life from one feeling of satisfaction to the next will not and cannot find any eternal meaning.  

In *Fahrenheit 451*, Ray Bradbury’s Guy Montag finds himself in a world where mankind lives only to pursue pleasure and exhilaration. People drive at high speeds, not to any particular destination, but only for the thrill of moving quickly. Families equip their homes with television rooms where screens cover the walls, inviting digital “relatives” to live with them. Upon leaving their homes, men and women insert headphones into their ears to keep themselves distracted from reality by non-stop music and advertisement.  

Worst of all, in Montag’s world, people no longer read books; the government outlaws citizens from even owning books. Montag himself is a government-employed book burner. Yet Bradbury does not fear government censorship as much as self-censorship: book burning in his world represents the intellectual (and spiritual) complacency of the people. One character remarks that, *“Even when we had books on hand… we didn’t use what we got out of them.”* People traded intellectual thought or contemplation of eternal truth for mindless entertainment.  

Although written over fifty years ago, Bradbury’s short novel shows uncanny resemblance to today’s “Generation Y.” Bradbury accurately predicts the ubiquity of iPod headphones hanging out of college students’ ears, freeing them from hearing the sounds of reality. Though four-walled televisions are still yet to come, fifty-inch plasma screens hang from many walls, filling any moments taken away from YouTube with digital cable and Netflix rentals. Though books are more available than ever, many people choose to skim blog headlines over the true intellectual stimulation offered in consideration of a good book.  

One of the main tasks of education is to move a student (young or old) from seeking after superficial pleasures to appreciation of truth, beauty, and goodness. To accomplish this task one should consider the discoveries of men and women from the past. Historically, books have proven to be an excellent means of this endeavor. A character in *Fahrenheit 451* laments that even when books were available *“we went right on spitting on the graves of all the poor ones who died before us.”* As a result of overemphasis on technology and vocational training, modern schooling subtly teaches students to rummage graves only for whatever helps in creation of a new, trivial pleasure. While books tend to connect readers with the past, pop media, which asserts a strong presence in schools, gives students unfiltered access to the present day.  

True education should not further enable a student to amuse himself to death (to borrow Neil Postman’s wise word); a child does this well enough on his own. Many schools place televisions in every classroom, and encourage students to indulge in triviality by showing them *Channel One News* (that is, bits of glamorized news placed between commercial advertisements). This proliferation of entertainment promotes endless childhood, the antithesis of education. Education instead is the process by which a man, like the Apostle Paul, puts away childish speech, thought, and reason.  

Education, and thus schooling, should equip a man to seek, in all of his life, *“whatever is true… honorable… just… pure… lovely… commendable… anything worthy of praise.”* A man does not, by nature, seek after such things. In her book *On Beauty and Being Just*, Elaine Scarry defends such a view of education: *“One submits oneself to other minds (teachers) in order to increase the chance that one will be looking in the right direction when a comet makes its sweep through a certain patch of sky.”* True education will reveal that which is not readily seen but is of great value to whoever will learn it.  

Ultimately, education has no value if it does not present a student with divine truth. The Preacher of Ecclesiastes warns, *“Of making many books there is no end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh.”* Thousands of years later, men and women write books *ad infinitum*; weariness of the flesh creeps upon all who seek understanding. Education that does not point to the Creator offers only finite benefit, and only the Gospel can save from the lament that *“all is vanity.”*  

In *Fahrenheit 451*, Montag’s fire chief Beatty argues that a man will find himself much more satisfied if he assembles a TV wall than if he “tries to slide rule, measure, and equate the universe.” Studying the universe, he says, will make “man feel bestial and lonely.” Beatty only affirms the words of the Apostle Paul when he wrote that though Creation points to the Creator, *“[man] became futile in their thinking, and their foolish hearts were darkened.”* Thus, eternally valuable education offers students the life-giving truth of the Gospel.  

Education is the process which frees a man from the trivial pursuits he naturally seeks. Books are an invaluable tool in this educational process. Books allow a man to live across hundreds of generations. Modern students need true education to fruitfully survive their culture which is inundated with media, distraction, and triviality. However, young students are not alone in their need for education; indeed, every man and woman needs to continue for his whole life the freeing work of education.
